What religion is the most popular in Gujarat according to the 2011 census?
What portion of the population of Maharashtra works in agriculture?
Leo remains one of how many modern constellations?
Are there people that speak German in all the inhabited continents? 
What is the Babylonian name for the stars Castor and Pollux?
What happens after the battle is complete when Charizard evolves into two mega evolved forms?
What animals are an integral part of Keralan culture and are referred to as the "sons of the sahya" in Malayam literature?
Which dynasty preceded the Liang dynasty?
Was the Crab Nebula created by a Type II supernova?
Who was the first to voice the original Mewtwo character in Japanese?
Did the Tuoba chief have the title of the Prince of Dai before 315?
How does Chinese mostly write words borrowed from English?
Is Urdu spoken in any schools in Maharashtra?
Urdu and Hindi have some similarities and do they have high mutual intelligibility?
Who portrayed Jigglypuff in the live-action musical Pokémon Live!?
Which empire ruled the Punjabi region directly before the British?
How many seats does the state that sends the largest number of legislators to the national Parliament contribute to Rajya Sabha?
What does Libra mean in latin?
Was Wang Yu an ethnic Qiang eunuch?
When did the coinage issued in Han dynasty end?
What is special about the Pikachu in Pokemon Yellow?
What color is Magikarp?
is Rajasthan located in the south of India?
Which was the first state of India to adopt Hindi as its sole official language?
How many constellations did Ptolemy name?
Which state has the wettest region in India?
Is Punjab both a state in India and a province in Pakistan?
Are there any records of the Xia dynasty?
Which constellation is associated with 1960s counterculture?
What are some of Pokemon's advantages compared to other characters?
Is "th" a dental fricative? 
Is Madhya Pradesh the largest state in India by population?
Is Liang Dynasty alson known as Northern Liang?
Who founded the Sui dynasty?
What language family is Portuguese part of?
What's the other name of the Shang dynasty?
Who started language policy?
Who ordered the killing of Xio Dong?
What are some earlier names of the language Urdu?
What classic text by Sima Qian described the Xia dynasty?
How many stars is the sickle marked by?
Is Uttar Pradesh divided into 3 districts?
In which region have the traditional regional dialects been replaced by new vernaculars based on Standard High German?
Do the stars Castor and Pollux appear far apart?
Is Virgo the largest zodiac constellation in the sky?
How far from Earth is the star that the planet HD 212771 b orbits?
Who first introduced the name Urdu?
Is Spanish a procedural language of the EU?
Who defeated the Shang?
What type of animals is venusaur's design based on?
How many grammatical genders does German have? 
What was Aries originally defined in ancient texts as?
Did Medical physicians have high status in the Han dynasty?
Was catholic a factors in the growing Chinese influence in the Northern Wei state?
Is Panjab known as place where growing crops is difficult?
Is London a major city in Gujarat ?
What is Latin for ram?
Can Virgo be seen at the equator?
How many Han mathematical treatises still exist? 
Is Jharkhand a neighbouring state of Bengal?
Did Shang have ritual and political complex?
Who ruled Gujarat in the 8th and 9th centuries CE?
What interrupted the Han dynasty briefly?
Is over half of Gujarat's geographical area used for agriculture?
Does M84 have most likely have a black hole orbiting the core?
Is Charizard known as the Flame Pokémon?
What type is Bulbasaur?
Were Gun's attempt to stop flooding successful?
Is the official language used the most widely in Kerala?
Who founded the Jin Dynasty?
What does the Chinese character Sui mean?
What is the third most populous city in Tamil Nadu?
Which religion is associated with Urdu in India?
Is Classical Arabic considered Standard Arabic?
Who are the counterparts of Aphrodite and Eros in the Roman variant of the story?
Was the basic grammar of Hindi published after India's independence?
What state was formed on 1 November 1956 on the Malabar Coast of India?
Was Buddhist art destroyed in the mid-6th century CE?
Is Siliguri located in the "Chicken's Neck" of India?
When did the Dutch East India Company first arrived in the archipelago?
Did Kou Qianzhi oppose Buddhism?
Who is very well known for singing a lullaby in the Pokémon anime series?
As of 2011, what percentage of West Bengal's religious population are not Muslim?
Did slaves belong to one of twenty ranks?
Which two words were combined to compose Squirtle's name?
Did King Afonso I of Portugal create the first Portuguese university in Lisbon?
What is the diameter of the Trifid Nebula?
How far away is NGC 520?
Is Aries highly visible from the earth?
In which evolution of Bulbasaur does the bulb on its back blossoms into a large flower?
When did Prithviraj Chauhan defeat the invading Muhammad Ghori in the First Battle of Tarain?
What is a Portuguese-speaking person or nation referred to as? 
When is there a tradition that marks the Pleiades as the vernal equinox?
How many exoplanet systems have been found in Aquarius as for 2013?
Which of the two official languages of Andhra Pradesh is a Classical Language?
Has Magikarp featured in its own mini-game?
Is Gem (Mekbuda) a double star?
Is Snorlax a legendary?
Who voices Squirtle in the anime?
Was the landowner’s land tax paid in coin cash 
Which is a distinctive feature of southwestern Mandarin that is hardly used in Beijing?
What percent of Bangladeshis use Bengali as their first language?
Is Libra part of Scorpio in current times?
How many older brothers did Mikey have in the episode 'The Battling Eevee Brothers'?
What languages loan words to Indonesian?
What principles did early classifications tend to follow?
How many information technology (IT) firms were operating in Karnataka in 2008?
Who restored Confucian education and the Confucian examination system for bureaucrats in the Sui dynasty?
Is invasion one of the reasons why English shows similarities with languages outside its linguistic clades?
Do British English and American English draw influence from each other?
How was Bengali known in the 21st century?
Who is Deucalion in Greek mythology?
What year was the Yanshi Shang City discovered?
Does French spelling tend to preserve obsolete pronunciation rules due to extreme phonetic changes since the Old French period?
Which dynasty is the first dynasty in traditional Chinese historiography?
Is Kolkata the seventh largest city by population in India ?
Who was the founder of the Sui dynasty?
Is Kolkata the largest metropolis in India?
Does Meghalaya have five representatives in the Lok Sabha?
Did the Xiongnu border the southern edge of Han territory?
Where did Psyduck make its debut appearance in the Pokémon series?
Is Pokémon: Magikarp Jump a mobile video game?
Which pakistan provinces do Rajasthan share a border with?
What is the evidence that there were ties between the distant areas of North China?
Is Indonesian word order closer to European languages or Asian languages?
In which year did Sima Yan declared himself emperor of the Jin dynasty?
Does Shanghainese have more polysyllabic words than Mandarin?
What were the illustriations of Eevee inspired by?
What is the brightest star in the Virgo constellation?
Does all of Rajasthan lie northwest of the Aravallis?
Is the carbon star CW Leo (IRC +10216) is the brightest star in the night sky at the infrared N-band (10 μm wavelength)?
Is Gujarat one of four Indian states to prohibit the sale of alcohol?
Who was Magikarp created by?
What does Pikachurin do?
Is there another starter in Red, Blue, and Green that has a dual typing?
Do Chinese overseas communities tend to use traditional Chinese characters more?
Who helped to begin the Silk Road trade network?
Did the Han dynasty establish granaries?
Who was the twenty-first Shang king?
Is every evolution of Charizard ground-bound?
What is the state capital of Andhra Pradesh?
Did only nationalistic concerns lead to the successful adoption of Indonesian as a national language? 
What were Chinese dynasties typically named after?
Is Leo one of the constellations of the zodiac?
What are the five famous rivers of Panjab?
How many stars are a part of Aquarius’ jar?
How many states have Arabic as an official language?
What were Pokémon Red and Blue known as in Japan?
Where did modern Spanish come from?
Is the Jin dynasty well known for the quality of its greenish celadon porcelain wares?
Were Roman cities built far from previous Celtic settlements?
Is the formal education conducted by Sundane?
Is French an official language of the Pacific Island nation of Vanuatu?
Is gold one of the major elements found in the orbit of the two galaxies found within Leo?
In 2011, Bloomberg Businessweek ranked French the sedoncd most useful language for business
According to the traditional chronology based on calculations made approximately 2,000 years ago by Liu Xin, what time period did the Shang dynasty rule from?
In what direction does Virgo border Libra?
Is the original of the name Bengal well known?
What is the official language of the People's Republic of China and Taiwan
What state has been at the forefront of LGBT issues in India and one of the first states in India to form a welfare policy for the transgender community?
What government system was based on in Wang Mang's reforms?
In which months is Gemini visible the entire night?
What is Libra’s name latin for? 
In the modern period how many forms of written Bengali were there?
What was the purpose of the state-run schools established by the Tang government?
Does Psyduck live in freshwater lakes?
What is the color of the long barbels on female Magikarp?
What is the the largest zodiac constellation?
 What branch of Romance Languages does Portuguese belong tp? 
Who overthrew the Hindu Shahis?
Was Eastern West Khasi Hills created in 2001?
How many genders in the German language?
Does Red have a Bulbasaur?
What color are the barbels on female Magikarp?
What does the ziladar do?
What will not dawn until the year 2597?
Is English one of the official languages of Switzerland?
What was the final capital of the Shang Dynasty?
How many inhabitants does Indonesia have?
Which ruler of modern-day Junagadh built a dam on the Sudarshan lake?
What is Madhya Pradesh?
What is the language with the most native speakers in Indonesia in 1945?
Are the Thar Desert and the Desert National Park located in the same state?
Does the Shang dynasty have another name?
What are Charizard's moves in Super Smash Bros. Brawl?
How does Jigglypuff sing for longer periods of time?
What dynasty followed the Shang dynasty?
How many modern constellations are there?
What did Cui Hao contribute to Sinicization?
Who identified Sagittarius as the god Nergal?
How many circles in Braj Kachru's model to distinguish countries?
Is Spanish the world's most spoken native language?
What is the area in central Europe where the majority of the population speaks German as a first language and has German as a (co-)official language called?
How long is the coastline of Gujarat?
When was Urdu chosen as an official language of Pakistan?
Does Chinese rely on affixes to provide grammatical information?
Did Tamil Nadu go through numerous regimes?
Who built the Shore Temple?
How many tones do most Mandarin varieties have?
What causes the Bengali language movement?
By the 16th century	 Deccani became the court language of what sultanates? 
Is NGC 520 is a pair of colliding galaxies located 90 million lightyears away?
What is the origin of the Spanish language?
Who founded the Jin dynasty?
What language does Daily Jang, Nawa-i-Waqt, and Millat use to publish in Pakistan?
Can you Mewtwo speak?
How many starters are there in the Pok√©mon Mystery Dungeon series? 
Is Andhra Pradesh bordered by Telangana to the north-west?
What is the official language of Taiwan?
Do players always need to avoid fatiguing when Squirtle is linked with Ivysaur and Charizard?
Does the black hole at the center of the M87 galaxy have a mass 7.2 billion times that of the Sun?
Is Magikarp a strong swimmer?
Which one of the six Classical languages of India is the official language of Kerala?
Does Gujarat contain the longest coastline in India?
Since when has English been spoken in Oceania?
Is Libra the largest constellation?
When did the constellation Virgo became associated with fertility?
In 1518, was Maharastra split into 10 Deccan Sultanates
Where was the University of Dhaka?
Is Folk music a large part of the Rajasthani culture?
What animal is Psyduck known as?
Around the end of which century did the standardization of Arabic reach completion?
Who was the owner of Eevee in Detective Pikachu?
What makes Chloe Cerise's Eevee special in the Pokémon anime?
Who is Phaethon's father?
Does HCG 87 contain only two galaxies?
Can Pikachu transform into a Rai?
Is the constellation whose name is crab in Latin a medium-size constellation?
Was Gerald of Braga a monk or a bishop first?
Which colonial language rapidly disappeared from Indonesia? 
What name did the English liked to use for Urdu?
What stars in Gemini have an extrasolar planet revolving around it?
Did Jiandi birth miraculously to Xie?
Who was succeeded by the Han dynasty?
Is Maharashtra the largest economy in India?
How many international airports are there in Maharashtra?
Why has the influence of Arabic has been most important in Islamic countries?
Is Urdu the most commonly spoken language in the world?
Are there many eagles in the Desert National Park?
Who intended to intervene in China around 10/11 AD?
The Shang dynasty is also known as what?
Who established Han dynasty?
Who designed Squirtle?
What was the fastest route to go from Daxing to the economic center of the Sui?
Is 60% of the cultivatable land in Maharashtra used for grain crops?
How many speakers does Lower Yantze Mandarin have?
Who established the Han dynasty?
Is Visakhapatnam the largest city in Andhra Pradesh?
Is the brightest visible region of the Milky Way have several embedded clusters?
Do prepositional phrases contain nouns?
From what dynasty did ancestors of the Ho dynasty of Vietnam claim descent from?
Did the wife of Antenteh beg him to ask the fish a beautifully furnished home?
Did Gao Huan make Yuan Yue emperor?
How many countries is Spanish the official or national language?
Which war marked the end of the Sikh empire in Punjab?
What kingdom did the Sui Dynasty unsuccessfully invade four times?
Does Snorlax’s name relate to his appearance? 
Are English language newspapers distributed in rural areas in Maharashtra?
Who voiced Mewtwo in the Japanese version of the Sound Picture Box?
Are bananas an important crop for Meghalaya's economy?
Were the stars of Pisces incorporated into the Chinese constellation Wai-ping?
Did the first reign of the Sui dynasty promote Southern Shangqing school of Taoism?
Is Bulbasaur Ash's most faithful Pokémon from the beginning?
Is Kolkata the largest city in India?
Was a Pikachu balloon featured in the Macy's Thanksgiving Parade in 1999? 
The Han dynasty is known for the many conflicts it had with whom?
Before the 17th century, what is the most important language of diplomacy in French?
People of which profession invented porcelain?
How many dialects of Portuguese are there in Portugal?
Does Tamil Nadu lie in the southernmost part of the Indian peninsula?
How long did the Indus Valley Civilization flourish at ancient period?
Did Tongwancheng fell in 427?
How many well-known star clouds does Sagittarius contain? 
What series artist noted that Venusaur was his least favourite Pokémon to draw due to its complex design? 
What dominated the state's economy?
Was an undead Psyduck brought to life by a Koga Gastly get destroyed by Red's Bulbasaur?
Who killed Cancer in Greek mythology?
What is the capital city of Gujarat?
How many verified exoplanets orbit the 29 stars in Virgo?
What was did Mao Xi try to persuade Chen Shubao to do?
What was the first native name for Bengali in the 16th century?
How many population did Tang dynasty have at the dynasty's end?
Who presided over the Han government?
What is Psyduck known as in Japan?
Is Rajasthan bordered by 7 Indian states?
When does Venusaur attract the most Pokémon?
What constellation is to the west of Virgo?
When was the magazine which innovated the use of "bisa" begun?
Is tourism a dead industry in Karnataka?
What is the brightest star in Aquarius?
Can Magikarp learn the move Flail in the first generation of Pokémon games?
Does the United States have a significant Russian-speaking community?
What is the largest industry in Maharashtra?
How many stars are in the cluster discovered in the year 1745 by Swiss astronomer Philippe Loys de Chéseaux?
According to the 2011 census, is the urban population of Maharashtra larger than the rural population?
Is the economy of Kerala the 10th largest in India?
Were the first speakers of English of early medieval England?
Is Libra also known as Claws of the Scorpion?
What did Southern and Northern Xiongnu disagree about?
Who can use strong psychic powers
Is television a main driver of Maharashtra's economy?
What balance does Libra's scales represent in the autumnal equinox?
Was Anglia a peninsula on the Baltic Sea?
Was the Chen dynasty founded by Chen Baxian?
How many possible evolutionary forms does Eevee have?
Where was Zhou's heartland
Did the "equal-field landholding system" and the "three-elder system" exist before 485 AD?
Where did Charmander first appear?
On what medium was the earliest evidence of Chinese writing found?
How many stars of naked eye visibility does the constallation contain?
Bengali has developed over the course of how many years?
Does 29 percent of the South African population speak SAE as a first language?
When was the item "Heavy-Duty Boots" released?
Were mother of Emperor Yang of Sui and Li Yuan sisters?
Did the Mughals came to power in 800 B.C.?
When was the medieval language that was the origin of Portuguese first recorded?
Which language is not recognized by the government of Bangladesh?
Where will the Sun be at the December solstice in 2700 AD?
Is "Dehlayi" another name for Urdu?
Which direction is Luoyang to Chang’an? 
On which date was the second-most populous state in India formed?
Whose translation of the Lotus Sutra was the most important before the 5th century?
What is the most recent Pokemon generation Eevee appears in?
What is the most recent generation where Psyduck has appeared?
Is Mysore the capital of Karnataka?
Was bronze relevant to the Shang dynasty?
Has Wei unified the North in 439?
Is Kannada the only language spoken in  Karnataka?
Has Psyduck appeared in more than one Pokemon game?
What percent of the European Union's population spoke German as their mother tongue as of 2012?
During which dynasty did Confucian philosopher Wang Tong write and teach?
What are the four seasons of Karnataka?
Is the percentage of women aged 15-49 that have never attended school larger than the percentage of men aged 15-49 that have never attended school?
Was Rajendra Chola able to capture lands beyond the borders of modern-day India? 
How many Vedic Mahajanapadas were there? 
How many Buddhist images from the time of the Wei dynasty have been found?
Which countries is Punjab part of?
Was the emperor the highest priest in the land during the Han dynasty?
Is Mandarin the official language of Japan?
When did the Tang dynasty rule?
As of the 2011 census, what percent of the Indian population didn't speak Urdu as their first language? 
How many total Pokemon make up Bulbasaur's evolutionary line, including Bulbasaur?
Which language belongs to the Western Hindi group of the Central Indo-Aryan languages?
What religion was introduced through trade with the Abbasid Caliphate?
In which year Emperor Wen of Liu Song was assassinated by his son, Liu Shao? 
On how many sides is Meghalaya surrounded by Bangladesh?
Were the "dragon bones" found near Anyang and found by archaelogists of Academia Sinica between 1928 and 1937?
What did West Bengal undergo for many decades?
Is Karnataka's estimated poverty ratio higher than the national ratio in 2011-2012?
What pokemon was Charmander's design based off of?
What is the largest bird in Meghalaya?
Where is "Formal" MSA learned?
What color eyes does Eevee have?
What is the capital of Madhya Pradesh?
Who is a large, blueish creature with closed slit eyes and a closed mouth that features two upwardly protruding teeth?
Which Charizard toy made my Tomy was replaced with compensation or replacements?
How did citizens view the Tang dynasty after natural disasters because of the Mandate of Heaven?
Is Kodagu the largest district in Karnataka?
Are there more people speaking English in 2016 than the late 18th century?
Who found the Liu Song dynasty
Who asked Zeus to raise Orion in both versions of the myth?
Is Cancer in the larger half of constellations?
Is Hinduism practised by more 50% the population?
What was the name of Emperor Wen of Sui when he was the regent to the Northern Zhou court?
What creature was the horse considered a relative of during the Tang dynasty?
What dialect was the first English poem written in?
Is Praesepe one of the nearest open clusters to our Solar System?
Why does fluency in Russian remain fairly high in countries where the people speak a Slavic language?
Is Charizard playable in any Smash Bros title?
When was the rump state of Western Liang conquered?
What inflences the agriculture in Punjab greatly?
Does Indonesian have a singular language that it is derived from?
Which parts of The Han empire had to pay their labor tax?
What is the capital of Maharashtra
Was the modern school system in West Bengal influenced by Ram Mohan Roy?
Does Meghalaya generate excess electricity? 
Did the support for Bengali culture and language was disappeared in the 15th Century?
The Association of Spanish Language Academies which was created in Mexico, comprises the academies of how many countries?
Did Karnataka emerge as an independent political entity after the decline of decline of Satavahana power?
How many constellations did Ptolemy identify in the second century?
Did the Li family had any ethnic origins other than Han?
Which language is the second largest language spoken by 10.83% of the population in the state of Karnataka?
Portuguese has adopted a significant number of loanwords from which language, mainly in technical and scientific terminology?
Where is Scorpius located?
Did Middle French emerge after Old French?
Has the use of English has stopped growing?
Psyduck is one of how many different pokemon in the first generation of games?
Who was the first person who translated The Quran into Urdu?
How many people spoke English as their first language as of 2016?
Is Gujarat landlocked?
Who reestablished the Jin government at Jiankang?
Who succeeded in stopping the flooding of the Yellow River?
Cancer is best known among stargazers as what?
Who was the second wife of Emperor Ku?
What color is Charizard?
Does no specification of a national language in the constitution lead to harmony?
Who identified Scorpius in the second century?
Did Eevee appear in Detective Pikachu?
What was Emperor Wen's temple name?
What were Chinese pharmacists selling found by scholars in 1899?
Sagittarius contains the innermost galactic structure that can be observed in visible wavelengths
Which is the only recognised regional language spoken in Portugal?
Which is the longest river in Madhya Pradesh?
The most prominent and powerful state of Rajasthan at the beginning of the 13th century is now home to what cities?
Is Mandarin taught more often than Cantonese?
Which is the first dynasty in traditional Chinese historiography?
Is Psyduck a Water and Psychic type Pokemon?
Is M74 is a loosely wound (type Sc) spiral galaxy in Pisces?
When was Kerala formed?
Does National Highway 16 pass through Andhra Pradesh?
In what continent do the majority of Francophones live?
Which emperor came between Emperor Wen and Emperor Xuan of the Chen dynasty?
Which constellation lies between Libra to the west and Sagittarius to the east?
Was Sihikism accepted by the other religions?
Was "Pichu" always a predecessor of Pikachu?
What was one of Sima Rui's titles?
Where did Snorlax rank in Complex's "The 50 Best Pokemon Up to Pokemon Crystal"
What is the Japanese name of Charmander
What is Maharashtra's largest airport?
Is the Eastern Jin dynasty considered the last of the Six Dynasties?
Is Squirtle in the movie Detective Pikachu?
What does Charmander mean?
What is Junchi Masuda's favorite Pokemon?
Did women from the Tang dynasty have an influence on court politics?
Who presented himself as a Buddhist monarch who would use military force to defend the Buddhist faith?
Was Andhra State merged with Telugu speaking areas of Hyderabad in year 1963?
Is Spanish the only language spoken in Spain?
Where did the Emperor Taiwu of Northern Wei aim at during the attack to Hu Xia in 426?
What language did Reddy contended that it failed to appreciate as the national language in India.  
Where is Portuguese portuguesa located?
Is Epsilon Arietids a meteor shower?
Which languages are more widely spoken in the European Union than French?
How many people speak English as their first language?
When did Charizard make its video game debut?
Who were raised to the sky to serve as a reminder for mortals to curb their excessive pride?
From the point of view of spoken language, is Chinese one of the closest relatives of Russian?
In some old descriptions, which constellation is treated as the Scorpion's claws?
Where does most of Meghalaya's river's water come from?
Why did Emperor Ming execute thousands of members of the royal family?
Who is traditionally taken to be the last Zhou king?
What caused Egypt to push for an Egyptianization of the Arabic language?
How many Mega Evolved forms does Charizard have?
Who discovered Messier 80?
Does Meghalaya have a wealthy economy?
What is the name of the cultural and literary renaissance of the 19th century?
Did Psyduck made its appearance in battery-powerd toys?
What language did poets in Christian Hispania prefer to use for lyric poetry?
When did the Jin dynasty exist?
Did the dynasty founded by Tang of Shang yield the earliest known body of Chinese writing?
Is it true that a majority of Indian Punjabis are Sunni Muslims?
When did West Bengal and East Bengal separate?
In 541	 the people of which province rebelled under Lý Bôn?
Does the player had Eevee as a starter when Eevee first evolves in Pokémon Yellow?
Who was saved by a Magikarp?
How many rivers and mountain make up the boundary of the Punjab Province?
The earliest cities of Bengal date back to what period?
Did Snorlax first appear in the Game Boy video game Pokémon Red and Blue?
In which year British built a settlement in present-day Chennai? 
What other constellation depicts a wall protecting the Army of Yu-Lin in Aquarius?
Who created Charizard?
Is Spanish the most spoken native language?
Did Psyduck appear in Pokémon Stadium?
What is the state capital of Uttar Pradesh?
When did Ptolemy identify Scorpius?
What percentage of the Maharashtra population is urban-based
What type of star is Iota Leonis?
Does the Meghalaya Legislative Assembly have 170 members at present?
Is Maharashtra the second largest state in India by area? 
Does German's consonant system have more consonants than other languages?
After the Moorish invasion began in Spain, which language did the Christian population continued to speak?
Why has criticism been directed towards Magikarp in the past?
Under Emperor Wen, was the Liu Song's unification of territory stronger than the economy
Did C.V. Raman discover the Raman Effect at the first research institute in Asia?
What is the meaning of Pisces in Latin?
Was Chen Baxian a former high-ranked Liang general?
How many phonemes are in German?
More than 80,000 bodies of Chinese writing have been found since 1930
How many prominent stars does Aries has?
In which century were considerable amount of French vocabulary first incorporated into English?
Does Taurus mean Bull in Latin?
How did Emperor Xiaozhuang start a civil war against the Erzhu clan in 530?
When was Uttar Pradesh establish?
Who was succeeded by Chen Xu (Emperor Xuan)? 
What were the princely states and Jagirs of the Deccan States Agency merged into after Indian independence?
Who was the first to voice the original Mewtwo character in Japanese?
Is Madhya Pradesh the largest Indian state by area?
What is Urdu a form of? 
The Sun takes the longest to pass through which Zodiac constellation?
What is the Arabic term for the process of giving a new shade of meaning to an old classical word?
What do the Javanese people call Scorpius?
Is Nergal generally depicted with 3 heads?
Is Gujarat bounded by Europe to the southwest?
Who finalized the design for Psyduck?
When did India partition into India and Pakistan?
Is the pre-evolution of Snorlax obtainable?
Outside of Japan, what are the names of the Pocket Monsters games, Red and Green? 
Was Zhou's using of  bronze ritual vessels, statues, ornaments, and weapons influenced by Shang material culture?
Is virgo the home to the optically brightest quasar in the sky?
In Asia, what did setting up a free education system using Spanish do?
What is the total length of surface road in the state having the largest road network in India?
The Bamboo Annals are similar to what account?
Was Reiko Takashima the first to voice Mewtwo?
What is the first-most commonly taught foriegn languages in schools and universities in the United States?
Is Tamil Nadu an agrarian state?
What is the official language of Meghalaya?
Is Russian the second most spoken Slavic language?
What star	 after having been a stable 2.3 magnitude star	 has become a variable star fluctuating between 2.0 and 1.6? 
What motivated the domestic trade and transporting troops?
When did Islam emerge as the major power in southern Punjab after the Umayyad caliphate conquered the region?
Which family does French belong to?
Why were official overseers needed for Bronze working?
What did a salesman attempt to sell to Team Rocket?
Who made Mewtwo in Pokemon: The First Movie?
Is Scorpius one of the 48 constellations identified by the Greek astronomer Ptolemy?
Where was Phrixus taken by the golden ram after being rescued?
In what culture's historical texts was the Crab Nebula (M1) mentioned?
In which year was the Chen dynasty established?
Did the Sui dynasty last more than 40 years?
Did the Tang dynasty flourish and grow in the later half of the 9th century?
When was the Spanish colonization of the Philippines?
Is Piscis Austrinus also known as the North Fish?
What do some scientist theorize about the existence of the Xia?
Which pronoun denotes intimacy?
Was progress on the Great Wall of Chine made during the Sui dynasty?
Which part of the Indian Constitution deals with the official language of the Indian Commonwealth?
How many constellation crossed by all three of the galactic equator, celestial equator, and ecliptic?
What are speakers of English called?
What was the first technology park in India?
Are there more native Urdu speakers in India than Pakistan?
Which Indian state hosts the largest hockey tournament in the world?
Who conquered Northern Madhya Pradesh in the 13th century?
From which pokemon does Jigglypuff evolve when it reaches a certain point of happiness?
Where are the tombs of members of the ruling Xiao family?
Where are India's major financial institutions located?
What is the pose of the twins in the alternative visualization?
What is the official spoken language of the PRC and ROC?
What animals is Mewtwo similar to?
Was Emperor Wen called the 'cultured emperor'?
Which United States navy ship was named Libra?
How many consonants can a syllable start with?
Is the economy of Madhya Pradesh the largest in India?
Who is the final boss in Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver?
Is Spanish used in administration in the state of New Mexico?
What is the primary source of state income in Meghalaya?
Can Mega Charizard Y fly at 15000 meters of altitude
What is the Portuguese language known as in Latin?
What happened because of the Yellow River changing course?
Which general led Liu Song's army to recover Luoyang and Hulao during Emperor Wen?
Who was the first to voice the original Mewto character in Japanese?
When the Tang Dynasty rule 
Is the original Pikachu balloon still flying at the Macy's parade?
Can Bulbasaur survive for days solely on sunlight?
How many national parks and wildlife santuaries are there in Rajasthan?
NGC 6302 is a bipolar planetary nebula that is also called? 
Is Indonesian the first language of most Indonesians?
What percent of Indonesia spoke Sundanese in 1945?
How did the British Empire spread English?
Dao Yanzhi was a general under whose reign?
Did Emperor Wen recoverd the cities because of his martial abilities?
Did Li Jing become a a Chancellor of the Tang dynasty during the Taizong era?
Was only one religion practiced by those living under the Tang dynasty?
How many major units was the early Western Zhou army split into? 
Was modern literature of Bengali developed during the 19th and early 20th centuries?
Is Scorpio an ancient constellation that pre-dates the Greeks?
In the hierarchical social order, is the emperor at the apex of Han society and government?
Where is Libra located?
What are the five geographic regions of  Maharashtra?
Who are the parents of Persephone?
What annual meteor shower is associated with the Marsden group of comets that has a maximum zenith hourly rate of 54 meteors?
Is the state of Andhra Pradesh the second largest producer of eggs?
How many local lanuages are in Indonesian islands? 
How were varieties of Prakrit referred to?
In which year did Charizard have lots of usage after and before being outclassed by Primal Groudon?
What languages did Vinayak Damodar Savarkar write in?
How many Urdu speakers are there in Saudi Arabia
What did the States Reorganization Act add to the Bombay Presidency State?
Where in Virgo does the celestial equator cross the ecliptic?
Did the Emperor Taiwu destroyed the Northern Yan in 432?
What was the cause of Sima Dewen's death?
Is Telugu the mother tone of nearly 90% of indian population?
Gujarat is derived from which dynasty?
How many choices do players have for their starter Pokémon in Pokémon Yellow?
French, Romansch, German, and Italian are official languages of what country?
Was Jolteon designed by Atsuko Nishida?
What religion was practiced before Buddhism and Jainism in the Punjabi region?
What does syllable0-timed languages mean? 
Under whose reign did the Liu Song experience a golden age?
What is the probability that radiocarbon dating is incorrect about oracle bone ages?
Does Eevee has access to Extreme Evoboost In Pokémon Yellow?
Who founded the Sui dynasty?
When a crown prince of Northern Wei is named, who must his mother kill?
Does Mega Evolution allow Venusaur to transform into Gigantmax form?
Does Magikarp have yellow fins?
Spanish is the primary language in how many countries?
Is Portuguese commonly taught in the United States?
What witnessed competing and conflicting interests in the Punjab?
How many inhabitants does Andhra have? 
Which star is located about 1.8 degrees west of Epsilon Tauri?
Who said that they liked Psyduck when it was just charmingly dopey?
Was Kashmir paying tribute to the Tang dynasty?
Is Gujarat bounded by the Arabian Sea to the northwest?
Who killed Emperor Yuan?
What belief is a source of friction and contentious debate in India?
In the German lore of Antenteh, why did the  fish become angry?
Who was conquered by Emperor Wu of Liu Song in  410
Are Jigglypuff's eyes pink in color?
Can Jigglypuff become Wigglytuff?
Who did Princess Nanyang marry?
What were many Afghans exposed to that caused them to become fluent in Hindi-Urdu?
How do you know Charizard is angry?
Is Maharashtra the the second-largest state by area in India?
Who ordered his edicts engraved in the rock at Girinagar?
Since what year did Brexit rekindle discussion on whether or not French should again hold greater role within the institutions of the European Union?
Was Surat a thriving and luxurious place for some in the 1500s?
When was the Bombay state created?
Do grains and staples production cover about 70% of the land area dedicated to crops?
Which country is Madhya Pradesh a state in?
What was the largest city in the world in the 8th century?
Are the Meghalayan forests a rich botanical habitat of Asia?
What is the area of the M35 cluster?
Is French the most common language in Canada?
Are the civil unrest and the shift towards religious homogeneity two major consequence of partition?
What are the names for three evolution versions of Charmander?
Did Xin dynasty exist for more than 20 years?
Who was Liu Jun's son?
What year marked the rise of the Chen dynasty?
Which dynasty's former general did Akbar defeat in the Second Battle of Panipat?
What is the part of speech of the word Você?
Has Venusaur ever appeared in anime?
What videogames did Magikarp first appear in?
What percent of the European Union's population speaks French?
What Eeveelution was known as the "false prophet" on a famous Twitch stream?
Does the object constituent follow the subject constituent?
How many Indian prime ministers come from Uttar Pradesh?
Which country is Urdu the national language of?
Which similar game character is the reason Jigglypuff is in Super Smash Bros.?
Was Wen the last emperor of the Sui dynasty?
Why did Northern Wei emperors build the Great Wall?
When is the monsoon season in Punjab?
Is it true that Scorpius does not contain any bright stars?
Can Blastoise evolve from Squirtle?
Is Kota the captial of Rajasthan?
What does the name 'Meghalaya' mean?
What Pokemon appears as a bipedal feline that is 6 feet 7 inches? 
When does the largest number of sanghas visit Ambaji village?
Where does the majority of the world's French-speaking population live?
Where is the Sagittarius constellation located?
What other character does Charizard's anime voice actor voice?
Who is Pikachu voiced by?
When was Standard High German standardized?
Who wrote "A History of Vernacular Literature"?
Who created central government monopolies administered by former merchants?
Why was Javanese not picked as a national language?
Is Kerala considered to be an impoverished state in India?
What constellation is to the west of Virgo?
Did Portuguese evolve from Old Galician?
In Pokémon: The First Movie, Mewtwo is the creation of who?
What is the world's ninth-most populous subnational entity?
What states does Madhya Pradesh Border?
What are three important sites of the ancient Indus River Valley civilization?
Where was the capital of Jin before Eastern Jin?
How many major bio-provinces can the forest of Andhra Pradesh be divided into? 
Who was Bulbasaur designed by?
Does Jigglypuff has an exact limit to the size it can grow to?
How many schools of thought came to dominate during the Eastern Zhou?
Are lions one of the most common animals species present in Maharashtra?
Which company gave the pokémon the name "Psyduck"?
What is Snorlax known as in Japan?
Where are the tombs of a number of members of the ruling Xiao family?
Why was the National Cricket Academy opened?
What city is Awadhi cuisine from?
Is Praesepe one of the nearest open clusters to our Solar System?
Who was force by Xiao Yi to surrendered to Northern Qi?
Is French the most widely spoken mother tongue in the European Union?
What is the brightest star in Libra?
What is Magikarp known as in Japan?
In what year did the Northern Wei dynasty start ruling northern China?
On what factors did Nintendo decide to give names to the pokemon?
The northern part of which region in Karnataka is the second-largest arid region in India?
What is the official language of Madhya Pradesh?
Why was the throne passed to Chen Geng or Emperor Wen of Chen from Chen Baxian in 559?
Is Hindi is a protected language in South Africa?
Which character did modern China use to refer to people and language?
Did Tang dynasty last more than thirty-seven years?
Which continent is Punjab located?
In which episode was the first appearance of a Snorlax?
Is the Deccan Plateau part of the forests that the Andhra Pradesh Forest Department protects?
Did the first imperial dynasty unite the Chinese Warring States by conquest?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the zodiac?
What weakened considerably after the death of Emperor Aurangzeb in 1707?
How does Jigglypuff put their enemy to sleep?
Where is the eighth avatar of the Hindu god Vishnu said to have been born?
What was the most important text for German language standardization?
Can common visitors take a flight in Kota at Rajasthan?
Who is a pioneer for systematic study on Urdu in British India?
Is Zhou the longest dynastic regime in Chinese history?
Why did Wang Mang restore the government's old monopoly on the salt and iron industries?
How many seasons does Karnataka experience?
Did any refugee ever settle in the south of the Yangtze River?
Bagri belongs to what group of Indo-Aryan languages?
Which language family does Portuguese belong to?
Did the Emperor Taiwu only plan one attack to Northern Yan dynasty after year 432?
What material was used in weapons?
What is the second most populated state in Tamil Nadu?
Was Chang'an the capital of The Sui dynasty?
How many stars did Ptolemy catalogue?
Did the Xin Dynasty allow the sale of slaves?
When was the Royal Spanish Academy founded?
How wide are highways in Kerala?
Was Aurangzeb the sixth Mughal Emperor?
Who taught did the Chinese learn to make sugar?
Is it true that the manufacturing sector in Tamil Nadu does not contribute to the state's GDP?
Is 52% of the population of Karnataka female?
Was Pokémon Mystery Dungeon: Adventure Team released in the USA?
Who is Mewtwo's partner in Pokemon Masters?
In what year did the Tuoba Wei dynasty unify northern China?
How many stars of the Gemini constellation can be seen without instruments?
What relation do Boötes and Virgo have in mythology?
Is English a West Germanic language of the Indo-European language family?
Who designed pikachu?
In what region is the French language is most likely to expand and also where the language has evolved the most in recent years? 
What Pokemon game features Pikachu as the only available starter Pokemon?
When will the Sun be in Scorpius at the December solstice?
Are Yinxu people are more closely related to southern or northern Han chinese?
Who was responsible for spreading English in the 17th century?
At what level can Bulbasaur evolve into Ivysaur?
Is Rajasthan a state in South Africa?
Did Reiko Takashima voice the first Mewtwo?
Is Tamil Nadu prone to earthquakes?
How does Maharashtra protect its population of tigers?
What are the four forms of English?
Does the constellation named Wei stand for granaries?
Is Psyduck's attack stable when Misty uses it?
What did Chinese lost during the Sixteen Kingdoms era?
Is Pikachu a real being?
Who voiced Snorlax in the Japanese versions of the Pokemon anime and the Super Smash Bros. series of video games?
Did any emperors practice Buddhism in the Sui dynasty?
What percentage of Pakistan's population spoke Urdu as their native language around 1992?
Where is India's largest stock exchange?
What is the alternative name for the Chen dynasty?
Who wrote the chapter "Peacock Flying Southeast"?
Is Montreal in Canada?
What was squirtle's final design based on?
Did Emperor Jianwen abdicate to Hou?
What are the two stars in Cancer brighter than fourth magnitude?
Who designed Vaporeon?
Which constellation is one of the 48 constellations described by the 2nd century AD astronomer Ptolemy and whose brightest star is Pollux?
What in the region ended around 12 B.C.E. when the Punjab fell under the Sassanids?
Who was the successor to the successor of Emperor Wen?
Was the Arabic Academies first established in Damascus?
In what season does the Sun appear in Libra?
What King of Wei usurped Emperor Xian?
Did the New York Times compared a duck-billed platypus to Psyduck?
What are the state's main ethnic group?
When was French introduced to new territories in the Americas, Africa and Asia?
Is Psyduck Generation I?
Does Meghalaya have a rich base of artificial resources?
Who was the first in British India to begin a systematic study on Urdu?
Did the divine King Rama reign within the regional borders of modern-day Uttar Pradesh?
When was the standard papermaking process invented by Cai Lun? 
When did Early Modern English begin?
Does the dialect Min originate from southeast coast?
Is Snorlax the heaviest Pokémon?
Was Goa a former Portuguese colony in Asia? 
In which episode did the Jigglypuff's first apperance in the Pok√©mon anime series?
French is the first language of 29% of the population in what North American country?
When did Alexander the Great invade Punjab?
Who created Psyduck?
Did Emperor Yang of Sui's father seek to gain support from the nomads?
What is the name of the special group of Pokémon that are very rare and usually very powerful?
How many portraits in the copies from the Song Dynasty are missing when compared with the original work of the Portraits of Periodical Offering of Liang
The Liang dynasty was succeeded by which dynasty?
How many native Urdu speakers are there?
How tall is Mewtwo?
What other dialects do not refer to the Standard Hindi language?
Is the total population of Madhya Pradesh over 70 million people?
Did Yang Guang have a consort who was a poet?
Who owns Eevee in Detective Pikachu?
When exposed to a "Thunder Stone", what can Pikachu transform into?
How many troops did the Sui amass on the Yangtze river?
Who owns a unique Eevee incapable of evolving?
Where is Taurus located?
Why scorpio constellation is called as "learning coconut tree" by the Jaanese people?
Is Cancer the dimmest of the zodiacal constellations? 
Which dialect is the basis for Standard Chinese phonolgy?
Are the Castor and Pollux stars physically similar to each other?
What do the dialects of Arabic have in common with the Romance languages?
What Pokeman can Munchlax evolve into?
Did Shun sent the leader of the surrounding tribes to suppress the tribe that continuously abused the border tribes?
Are all galaxies in the Virgo constellation present in the Virgo cluster?
How many native speakers did Indonesian have in 2010?
What is the Former Qin state?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the sky?
What is Latin for twins?
Is French spoken by more than 20% of the European Union's population?
In what year did the Tuoba Gui defeat the Rouran tribes and kill their chief Heduohan?
What is Snorlax known as in Japan?
What is Kharibolis' earliest form?
Did Modern English continues the regularisation of irregular forms?
Who conquered Song in 286 BC?
What is the size of the Desert National Part in Jaisalmer?
What is the earliest Sanskrit text to mention Kerala as Cherapadha?
Where did Snorlax first appear?
What language is termed "the language of Camões"?
In the Greek mythology, who did Aries save?
When did Xiao Ying die?
On how many limbs does Psyduck walk on?
What is the most populated state in India?
What caused the difference between Scorpio's astrological sign and astronomical constellation?
Does part of the Anglo-Frisian languages originate from a Germanic tribal?
How long did the Eastern Han dynasty last?
NGC 2903 is similar to which galaxy
What is the meaning of the name of Capricornus' brightest star?
Is it true that venusaur served as the moscot in three video games?
How many consonants does Bengali have?
Does Portuguese have the highest potential for growth as an international language in Southern Africa?
Were Sui emperors proud of their Han ancestry?
In what season is the Sun in Scorpius?
As of 2011, what percentage of West Bengal's religious population are neither Hindus nor Muslim?
Where did Pyrrha go after the flood?
Where do the majority of the world's French-speaking population live?
in 709 who requested Emperor Zhongzong to grant women the right to bequeath hereditary privileges to sons
Who referred to the Libra as "MUL Zibanu"?
What were Johannes Hevelius's four subdivisions of Pisces?
Is Bulbasaur the fire starter in Pokemon Red and Blue?
What is the most spoken variety of Spanish?
What is Virgo?
Who created the Song Dynasty?
Who established the Gujarat Sultanate in 1407?
Is the state the dryest region of India?
Does Cambay have beautiful architecture?
Who were killed before Western Wei installed Xiao Cha as emperor of (Western) Liang?
Which character is kiiled, causing Mewto to destroy the lab and escape?
Is the main component of Tarf an orange giant?
What was the most common material that the Shang dynasty wrote on?
Who ruled Gujarat in the 8th and 9th centuries CE?
How many inhabitants does Andhra Pradesh have?
What are Maharashtra's two principal seaports?
Were the loanwords in Spanish were taken from more than one type of Latin?
Did the Hundu Shahi rule much of Punjab and eastern Afghanistan in the ninth century?
Are commanderies smaller than provinces in the Han empire?
What is Charizard known as in Japan?
What are the chinese characters for the name "Chong?"
Why did more lower-class people enter the Imperial Examinations?
What is the name of the emperor of An Lushan?
What is contained within Capricornus?
Portuguese is the official language in how many countries?
What item can be used to wake up a Snorlax?
How many Japanese onomotapoeia is Pikachu's name derived from?
Which of Jigglypuff's moves has altered mechanics in the Super Smash Bros series?
Which constellations border Capricornus under modern boundaries?
What district was formed by the further division of East Khasi Hills district on 4 June 1992?
How many categories of Pisces did Johannes Hevelius in his Firmamentum Sobiescianum note?
What is Venusaur's first evolution?
Which dynasty first established the money economy?
Was the word Kerala is first recorded as Keralaputo?
When picking a national language, what were the two most widely spoken local languages?
Is Karnataka a state in the northeastern region of India?
Which place has the 10th-largest economy in India?
Which dynasty preceeded the Tang in using mechancial puppets?
Who was Empress Wu's son?
Do Epsilon Geminid meteors have a higher velocity than Orionids?
Are floods and droughts common in Uttar Pradesh?
Whose son usurped the Jin throne and declared the dynasty of Huan Chu?
Is Fujian in northern China?
How many population does Gujarat have?
As of 2011, what percentage of West Bengal's religious population are Muslim?
Is Rajasthan currently under British control?
What was the Sui dynasty capital?
Was Equatorial Guinea part of. the CPLP in 2009? 
What dialect is Standard Mandarin Chinese based on?
Are the headquarters of most of the major corporate and financial institutions in Mumbai?
What profession was Pierre Méchain?
What year did the Phillippines gain independence?
Which language is the most of modern Spanish vocabulary derived from?
Where did Namboothiri Brahmins migrate to Northern Kerala from?
Did Charmander's personality persistent all the time?
When did the December solstice take place in Capricornus?
Where does Snorlax stay in Pokemon ranger?
In how many years after Northern Liang’s capital Guzang had been captured did the whole Northern Liang go under the Northern Wei?
What is the official language of Spain?
What percentage of Urdu verbs do not have their roots in Sanskrit and Prakrit?
Which city is India's fiancial and commercial capital?
Is Mewtwo a fictional creature from Nintendo?
Around when did the first civilizations arise in the Punjabi Region?
When did Chen Baxian established the new powerful Chen dynasty?
When did Sanskrit apabhra emerge?
In which year did the Xianbei-ruled Northern Zhou conquered the Northern Qi  and reunified northern China?
Is Portuguese the most spoken Romance language in the world?
Did the oldest refrence to Rajasthan date to 200 CE?
Namboothiri Brahmins migrated to Northern Kerala during the early Middle Ages ?
What is the areas of West Bengal in square miles?
What was reintroduced in 186 BC by Grand Empress Dowager Lü Zhi? 
What is the most common language spoken among Gujarati Muslims
Were there more than ten musical instruments dated to the Xia dynasty?
Who was Liu Yu's eventual successor?
Why is getting accurate data about diasporic portuguese speakers hard?
Are there more than 5,000 festivals celebrated in Kerala annually?
When did Potti Sreeramulu fast to death?
How many exam type are there for imperial candidates?
In the 18th century, did Tamil Nadu have a consistent and stable political system?
What is the highest that Charizard can fly?
Does Rajasthan mean the "land of the Sea"?
Which Emperor founded the Sui dynasty? 
What is one of the dinosaur species found at Balasinor?
Who was the founder of the Tang dynasty?
When did Uttar Pradesh win its first Ranji Trophy tournament?
What type is Charmander?
Who appoints the titular head of government in West Bengal?
What is the cause that let Zhou defeat Di Xin's army?
What region in West Bengal includes the location Sandakfu?
M80 was discovered in 1881 by who? 
Was rituals and sacrifices invented by the Tang dynasty?
When did the last assembly before independence hold its last sitting?
Who did the Han dynasty have many conflicts with?
Who was the last ruler of the Chen dynasty
Are there groups of at least 2 galaxies in Capricornus?
How many squirtles were in the Squirtle Squad in the Pokemon anime?
How many speakers does Portuguese have?
As of the 2011 census, what percent of the Indian population didn't speak Santali as their first language? 
Do Charmander or Squirtle have dual typings?
Which group of comets is The Daytime Arietid Meteor Shower associated with?
Which Pokémon are capable of human speech?
Was Xia the dynasty that precedes Tang dynasty in traditional historiography?
Do Francophones make up the majority of the population in French Polynesia?
Is Galicia a country? 
How many different evolutions does eevee have?
What is the population in Rajasthan according ot the 2011 Census of India?
Who described the Beehive Cluster as "the nebulous mass in the breast of Cancer."?
Which dialect does the Manchu people speak?
Was the constellation associated with the golden ram of Greek mythology not fully accepted as a constellation until classical times?
Who ruled Jiankang before the Sui?
Is English mutually intelligible with Dutch?
Is Charizard considered a dragon?
How many heads is the god Nergal generally depicted with?
Which state encompasses the highest number of ancient Indus Valley Civilisation sights?
Is Pikachu the only Pokemon who can do electricity attacks?
Was Neelam Sanjiva Reddy after Tanguturi Prakasam Pantulu to become the Chief Miniter?
Di Sima Fei and Sima Chuzhi both married Xianbei Princessess?
Who is the father of Phaethon?
Which is a long-period binary star in the Gemini constellation which is divisible in medium amateur telescopes?
Where does river Krishna flow into?
In 304, did the Jin dynasty have a time of peaceful prosperity?
In how many countries or provinces is German an official or co-official language in?
Who wrote the Explanation of the Mean?
Who was the wife of the legendary Emperor Ku?
What Pokemon species is Bulbasaur? 
Is the father of Yu the Great ordered to be imprisoned for life by Shun?
What is the name of the optically brightest quasar in the sky?
Which sport has Kodagu contributed to?
Who voices Psyduck in Japan?
Which pokemon does Jigglypuff evolve into when exposed to a Moon Stone?
Is the population in Gaul all indigenous in origin?
Who established the Xia dynasty?
Where did Portuguese originate? 
Is Malay one of the four official languages of Singapore?
Until the 20th century, Was there more than half of Chinese people spearking only their local variety in the South China?
Is Karnataka ranked as the most popular destination for tourism among states of India?
In which year was the first successful agitation that ousted an elected government after the Independence of India ?
Who founded Physical Research Laboratory and envisioned Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad?
Did the Tang government favor open competition for government positions?
Can all of the milky way be observed with visible wavelengths?
Does the US Intelligent Community regard Russian as a "hard target" language?
Is the Vizhinjam International Seaport classified as an intermediate port?
Who is the author of the book that adopted the story that Misty assumed her Psyduck has evolved into another duck?
How many speakers does the Urdu language have in the world in 2018?
What dynasty is between Former Han and Later Han?
Which river's tributaries include the Banjar, the Tawa, the Machna, the Shakkar, the Denwa and the Sonbhadra rivers?
Which character in Pokemon are characterized by putting their enemies to sleep by singing a lullaby? 
What is the capital of Meghalaya?
What does Capricorni's traditional name mean?
Who is Asia's biggest dairy?
How did Multan become the center of Islam?
In which year was the popular radio station taken over by the local municipality and later by All India Radio (AIR) and moved to Bangalore?
Is Urdu written right-to-left?
Does Asian langugae contribute to Indonesian the most beside local languages?
What is Charmander known as in Japan?
In the Annals of the Yin, who was the ancestor of Tang who was granted a place called Shang as a fief?
What awakens the power of Psyduck?
Who destroyed the vassal state of Guzhu?
Does Venusaur have an evolution?
In how many clusters did Linguist Suniti Kumar Chattopadhyay group the dialects of the eastern Magadhan languages?
Whose denunciation of Buddhism foreshadow the revival of Confucian theory in the Song dynasty?
Who is known as the Sage of Tea? 
What is the luminosity of Beta Cancri compared to the Sun?
In the Pokémon anime, was the first appearance of Snorlax after episode 40?
Zu Chongzi calculated pi to how many decimal places?
Is Pisces associated with a story including fish in the Greek legend?
What is the length-to-breadth ratio of of the Meghalaya?
In different versions of Greek mythology, besides Apollo, who could have sent the scorpion to kill Orion?
How many words are in english, not including obsolete words?
what was the name of the independent state the Dravidar Kazhagam party sought to establish?
What percent of the population speaks Russian in Estonia?
Did Arabic emerge after the 4th century CE?
Has Balbasaur introduced people to the different aspects of the Pokemon universe? 
Which notable personalities in Malayalam Cinema are recipients of Jnanpith award?
Who was the second emperor of the Liu Song dynasty?
Which ability allowed Charizard to have a presence in the competitive battle scene?
Which branch of the Germanic languages is divided into a wide variety of dialects?
What is the name of the war that began after the British annexation of Punjab in 1849?
What year was Sound Picture Box Mewtwo published?
Which star in the Gemini constellation includes a primary yellow supergiant of magnitude 3.1 and is visible in binoculars and small telescopes?
Where was Yu the Great's father ordered to be imprisoned for life?
In standard Bengali, Is stress predominantly initial?
What animal is Psyduck based on?
Do the scholars have the same view regarding whether English is a mixed language?
What is Charizard known as in Japan?
Natixis said that French could become the world’s most spoken language by 2050	 noting that it spreading especially in which African region? 
Indonesian is a standardized variety of Malay
Why was Antares named that way?
Are the stars of Aries incorporated into the same constellations regardless of cultures?
What is the Chinese translation of the title "emperor"?
During which period were the Old High German dialects separated from Old Saxon? 
What is the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
Is the capital of the state originally known as the State of Mysore Bangalore?
Can Charmander be seen in episode 8 of Pokémon Indigo League?
How many official languages are used in the United Nations?
How many stars did Galileo spot in the Beehive cluster?
Is the Sun in the constellation Capricornus in Feburary?
Was Cameroon a colony of the German Empire?
Are there exoplanets in Aquarius that may have liquid water on their surfaces?
How many years was Xiao Xian the Liang Emperor?
What does Ordu mean in the Turkic?
Who was Chen Xu's son?
Is the tub of Antenteh sometimes recognized as the Great Square of Pisces?
Does the name of the constellation with the brightest star named Spica mean maiden in Latin?
Who portraited the visit of numerous dignitaries? 
In traditional historiography, what dynasty was Xia later succeeded by?
Is Hinduism followed by over 50% of the population?
Urdu had been promoted by which form of literature?
Who ruled Karnataka directly before the Satavahanas did?
How many international airports exist in Maharashtra?
After Huan Xuan's fall, Did Liu Yu gained control of the Tang dynasty?
Which literary collection was passed down for generations?
Is Urdu spoken in Andhra Pradesh?
Why does Charmander leave Damien in Pokémon Indigo League?
Is Meghalaya's assessed generation capacity more than 3000 MW? 
Is Pikachu an electric type Pokemon?
Does Squirtle appear in more than five games outside of the main series?
Did the Northern Qi in reunified northern China in 577?
What was Ru expected to be when a dukedom was centralized?
Is Northern English one of the major dialect regions for English in England?
How many airports in Karnataka run international operations?
Is Urdu spoken in European countries?
Who appointed the victor of the Chu-Han Contention?
In which year did Pikachu first appear in the Japanese video games Pokemon Red and Green?
What is the second most taught foreign language in the EU?
Is Pisces an earth sign?
Which river is the largest tributary of the Indus?
Is German the most widely spoken Germanic language?
What is India's first 4-8 lane highway?
What were the most possible foreign invaders up to the 10th century CE for Gurjaratra?
Who created Eevee?
What airline had the first Pokémon airplane?
Which dynasty ruled before the  Tang dynasty? 
Where did the first systematic written use of the language happen?
Where is German the third most taught foreign language?
Is Spanish an Asian target language in Australia?
How many fingers did the Trading Card Game 2018 artwork show Charmander as having?
Does French use a space to separate thousands and a comma as a decimal point?
Who killed Jianwen?
Did Hou die a natural death?
Does Pikachu serve as the mascot of the Pokemon franchise?
Is Andhra Pradesh in the north-eastern region of India?
Who was the son or grandson of Tuoba Shiyijian the last Prince of Dai?
Did the first intervention of the nomadic Xiongnu confederation in China happen in 12 AD?
Does misty often release Psyduck on purpose?
In the video game series, when is Magikarp seen commonly?
Why did the Chen generals stop resisting?
What is considered to be the most popular Pokémon?
What is the official language of Andhra Pradesh?
Is the Taj Mahal in Uttar Pradesh?
Is 20th century AD the approximate date of the creation of the MUL.APIN?
Does India have at least 500 species of butterflies?
To which river do the 5 rivers of Panjab act as tributaries to?
Are Pollux and Castor physically similar to each other?
What is the largest city in Andhra Pradesh?
Who did Kittur rebel against?
Is German a fusional language?
What gave birth to Islamic influence in middle Bengali?
Emperor Yang was assassinated in which year?
Which forms of Charizard revert to normal once the battle is complete?
Did Charizard appear in Detective Pikachu?
Who was Zhongzong's mother?
Is Rajasthan a famous tourist destination?
What is Beta Librae also known as?
Are the vast majority of people in Brazil Lusophones?
Which railway zone is headquartered in Navi Mumbai?
After which dynasty did the Houjing Disturbance occur?
Is Andhra Pradesh the largest Indian state by area?
Is the earth in the Leo constellation?
Was Emperor Wu the uncle of Xiao Tui?
Does Karnataka have multiple native ethnicities?
How high can Charizard fly according to the video games?
French replaced which language as the most important language of diplomacy and international relations during the 17th century? 
Can you see Gemini stars without a microscope?
What is the major language in Punjab?
Is there a city in the Punjab region with a bigger population than Lahore?
Is West Bengal a state in the western region of India?
Where civilization does the star Spica's name come from?
What was the combined population of the Lusophone area as of January 2022?
What was China's first imperial dynasty?
was the Liang dynasty preceded by the Southern Qi dynasty and succeeded by the Chen dynasty?
What is Australia's program for foreign language education?
Where is the center of the Grand Canal?
Who identified Scorpius?
Is Scorpius located in the North celestial hemisphere?
In The Battling Eevee Brothers, what is the name of the character who didn't want to evolve his Eevee?
How many seasons does Karnataka experience?
When was the official boundaries of Aries defined?
Can Mega Charizard be found in Pokémon Red?
In which year did Chen kill Li Qianshi?
In the three-elders system, how many households make up one neighborhood?
Is Bulbasaur third in the Pokémon monster index?
When was Islam first practiced in the Punjabi region?
In Indonesian, which term meaning "you" is used for strangers?
Is human-wildlife conflict threatening animals in Karnataka?
Is the Southern Taurid stronger than the Northern Taurid on November 5?
What is a constellation without first magnitude stars called?
What is the largest city of Karnataka? 
Is Snorlax #1 on the Pokédex?
Which star in the Sagittarius constellation reached the peak magnitude of 4.3 and was discovered in 2015?
Is the Desert National Park located in West Bengal?
Did Emperor Xuanzong reduce the amount of time soldiers had to serve?
Did religion play a role in Tang politics?
Where is Charmander's flame?
Is the Infopark the third major IT hub in Kerala?
Why are the majority of deep-sky objects in Aquarius galaxies?
Why did the Former Qin begin to collapse?
Is Kerala the 23rd largest Indian state by area?
What animal is Leo?
What is the main language of El Pas de la Casa?
Is Maharasthra the second largest economy in India
Did the Li family ended the Tang dynasty?
What type of abilities does pikachu have?
What is the most spoken native language in the world?
Did one of Jehangir's grandchildren become a Mughal Emperor?
Does Tamil Nadu have a rapidly growing population?
What is the common ancestor of Filipino and Malagasy?
What did Paramara rule?
What geographical feature is Hindi ultimately named after?
Aries was not full accepted as a constellation until what period?
Who described the founding myth of Shang dynasty in the Annals of the Yin?
Which constellation is associated with twins Castor and Pollux in Greek mythology and is one of the 88 modern constellations today?
In which year did IGN rank Snorlax as the 28th best Pokémon, with editor Lucas calling it "one of the most recognizable Pokémon"?
Which constellation is the location of the Sun at the December solstice?
What district was formed in 1976?
Is Psyduck's appearance meant to trick enemies into thinking it is weak?
How many people outside of Egypt speak the dialect of Egyptian Arabic?
Did the ambitious construction projects help the dynasty become stronger?
Who voices Snorlax?
Which languages were heavily discouraged from use throughout the Taiwanese martial law period?
What is another name of NGC 6334?
Is Spanish the official language of Spain?
What are Charizard's two Mega Evolved forms?
Whose service did Liang's Emperor Wu offer himself to?
What is the Shang dynasty also known as?
How many people speak Levantine Arabic?
Was the Eevee pokemon designed by Donald Trump?
Is Gujarat the largest Indian state by  population?
Which languages are the official language of more states than Arabic?
Was Xiao Guan the sixth brother of Xiao Yi?
How many years did the Sui Dynasty last?
Who is the main person behind Pikachu's design?
Is Charizard a dragon type?
Is Andhra Pradesh the second most populated state in India?
Who are subdivision of districts in West Bengal governed by?
What language is Pikachu's name derived from? 
Is Madhya Pradesh in northern India?
When did Emperor Gaozong suffer a stroke?
Is Mandarin an official language of the UN?
What is the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
Is Mandarin an official language in Singapore?
For how many months is Cancer high in the sky?
Who founded the Chen dynasty?
Is magikarp a blue fish?
Is Karnataka the worse Indian state at cricket?
When the Yellow River flooded, who united together to control and stop the flooding?
In what celestial hemisphere is Libra located in?
Is the name Yīn used for the dynasty by the man who discribed the founding myth of the Shang dynasty?
What color is Psyduck?
Who was the last ruler of the Chen Dynasty?
What is the acronym for "Uttar Pradesh"?
What is the largest Indian state by area?
What color are the trails of normal meteors in the largest meteor shower radiating from Aquarius?
When did the Dutch East India Company first arrive in the archipelago? 
What language is a direct descendant of an early form of Vedic Sanskrit?
Is Rajasthan the largest producer of oilseeds?
Where did the ice used for preservation come from?
Is Gujuart the largest Indian state by are? 
What were Eevee's initial evolutions?
Is Hindus a significant minority faith of Pakistani Punjabis?
Where was Gun ordered to be imprisoned for life by Shun?
Ash Ketchum's Squirtle was the leader of what group before joining him?
What is Eevee best known for?
Which area in China has relatively uniform dialects?
What Latin spoken in Gaul did French evolve from?
Which state in India is the second-largest producer of oilseed
In what part of India is Tamil Nadu?
How many official languages does Haiti have?
Is it written in the Annals of the Yin that the dynasty was founded 13 generations after Xie?
Which country administered enclaves along the Gujarati coast, including Daman and Diu for over 450 years?
Besides Hindi, which is the official language of the Government of India?
Is the smallest constellation in the zodiac one of the 48 constellations listed by Ptolemy?
Is Awadhi a dialect of Hindustani?
Was Goguryeo one of the Three Kingdoms of Japan?
Why would men deliberately break their limbs during the Sui dynasty?
In which direction did the Chen dynasty make territorial expansion?
What is the supermassive black hole's mass in Sagittarius A*?
According to the 2011 census, did Kerala have the highest literacy rate and life expectancy among the Indian states?
Is Indonesian a standardized variety of Malay?
Does the star Chi Virginis have a planet?
Is Pisces a constellation of the zodiac?
Did the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi last more than a century?
Was Tuoba Xianbei Princess Nanyang married to a member of Southern Qi royalty?
Which island nation released a one-dollar coin featuring Mewtwo?
As of 2012, how many people in Europe spoke German as their mother tounge?
What company produced the "Charizard Medium Plush"?
Is climate important for Punjab's agriculture?
French is the an official lanugage in how many countires?
What is the most populous state in India?
What is the Islamic sacred book called?
How many seats does Maharashta contribute to Lok Sabha?
In how many countries is Spanish the primary language?
Who adopted the surname Yuan as a part of systematic Sinicization
What is commonly known as the Crab Nebula in the northern part of Taurus?
How many official languages are there in the United Nations?
Will an NPC sell the player a Magikarp in Pokémon Blue?
After the partition, the eastern part of Punjab became part of which country?
What during the 21st century caused the use of Portuguese to decline in Asia?
When was the division into Libra formalised?
In 2021, what was the food delivery company that landed in controversy?
Did Pratiharas rule any dynasties in India?
Whose travels from 139 to 125 BC had established Chinese contacts with many surrounding civilizations?
In what video game does a Charmander appear trying to attack players?
Did Tughlag dynasty defeat Rana Hammir Singh?
Where is Snorlax popular?
Did Nintendo publish Sound Picture Box Mewtwo in September 2000?
Who was the design for Eevee and its initial evolutions provided by?
What is the name of a large, elongated open cluster of magnitude 5?
Who proposed dates of the establishment of the dynasty to 1554 BC?
How much heavier is wuzhu compared to the coins that Emperor Wen allowed private minters to manufacture in 175 BC?
How many troops had Sui amassed in 588 along the northern bank of the Yangtze River?
Was Cameroon a colony of the German Empire in 1885?
How was the name Charmander formed?
Who preceded Helian Ding as the emperor of Hu Xia?
Was Wei an imperial dynasty of China founded by the Tuoba (Tabgach) clan of the Xianbei?
Does Maharashtra contribute to over 8.4% of India's economy?
What did Old English develop from?
Is the founding myth of the Shang dynasty is described by a Han dynasty historian?
Was Scorpius divided into two asterisms which were used by Bugis sailors for navigation.
Is Charmander a Pokémon?
Is Libra the brightest star in the constellation?
Under whose rule did Northern Wei officials begin to receive salaries?
When Indonesian was adopted as the national language, was it the language with the most native speakers?
What is the official language of Gujarat?
What did Leo represent to ancient Greeks?
Is the Eastern Jin dynasty the first of the Six Dynasties?
Were Tang dynasty government officials with more distant parents granted additional vacation time?
Is Maharashtra a state in the western peninsular region of India?
How old does Ash Ketchum turn in the first episode of the pikachu anime series?
What language has identical grammer to Hindi?
Is Standard Singaporean Mandarin similar to the official language of Taiwan?
What is the language of Muslims in Karnataka?
The Liu Song dynasty succeeded which dynasty?
Did Xiao Yi claim the imperial title as Emperor Yuan of Liang in 553?
When does Jigglypuff evolve?
Is one of the twenty five largest Indian states by area located on the Malabar Coast?
Is Spanish the most spoken language in the world?
What is the third most practiced religion in Gujarat?
Which constellation is located between Cancer the crab to the west and Virgo the maiden to the east?
Till when did the coinage issued by the central government mint in 119 BC remained the standard coinage of China?
When does the Indian Ocean monsoon bring rain to West Bengal?
What became the first state of India to adopt Hindi?
Has Urdu gone through name changes?
Who established the Chen Dynasty?
Is Sangam literature about the early history of the people and rulers of Tamil Nadu?
How many vowels does Hindi have?
Does Scorpius predates the Greeks?
Is the Western astrological sign for Scorpius the same as the astronomical constellation?
How many speakers of Russian are there in Eastern Europe?
Did small lacquered drums from Kucha become popular in China during the Tang dynasty?
Who lead an army to defeat and exile the Sanmiao tribe south to the Han River area?
What is the name of a little boy who was hiding the Evolution Pokémon from his three older brothers because they wanted him to evolve it?
Does the Sun appear in Aquarius in February?
What animal does Charmander look like?
What dynastics did the Sui unify?
According to the Sri Lankan chronicle Mahavamsa, did Prince Vijaya conquer modern-day Sri Lanka?
How was property divided amongst legitimate heirs under Tang law?
The politics of Rajasthan are dominated by which parties?
According to the 2011 census of India, were there more male or female in Karnataka?
When will the Sun stop being in Virgo during the autumn equinox?
How big is the area of Andhra Pradesh?
How does Magikarp appear in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl?
Are Muslims one of the top three largest communities in West Bengal?
How many Squirtle are in the Squirtle Squad?
In the sixth generation of the Pokemon video game series, what happens if a player gives Mewtwo Mewtwonite X?
When did the Xin Dynasty last?
Did Khizr Khan travel to Samarkand?
What is the official language of Gujarat?
Does its notable characteristics include big tails?
What percent of the population in 2011 was Hindus?
Which is the world's most spoken language overall?
Is Yanshi Shang City the same as Huanbei?
Is Venasaur the first evolution of Bulbasaur?
Is Sandakfu higher than 15,000 ft?
What is Pisces' name Latin for?
Was Modern English adopted in more than 2 continents?
What music genre did Swathi Thirunal Rama Varma popularize in the 19th century?
At what two levels could the "Tiny Turtle Pokemon" evolve into Wartortle?
When did Arabic first emerge?
How many languages are used as a medium for instruction in schools in Meghalaya?
What does Sagittarius mean in latin?
What percentage of all Chinese speakers speak Mandarin?
Did the Government of India standardize Hindi after independence?
Is the Aries constellation smaller than the Aquarius constellation?
Did Liu Zixun's uncle assassinate Qianfei?
What was the most important translation of the Lotus Sutra before Kumārajīva’s 5th-century translation?
Is German the most widely spoken west germanic language?
Who was enthroned as Jin Emperor in 318?
Where was Gyami spoken?
What language is French descended from?
Is Sheratan a bright star?
Are Christians a minority of the people in Andhra Pradesh?
What do Indonesian (in its standard form) and the Malaysian standard of Malay have in common?
Where is Charmander's flame whose size reflects both the physical health and the emotions of the individual?
Is the energetic mood used in Classical Arabic?
What country is the Taj Mahal in?
When is English considered the most spoken language in the world?
What were the two periods of the Jin Dynasty?
Who did Red's Venusaur defeat by teaming up with Blue's Charizard and Green's Blastoise?
Is Meghalaya the 17th most literate state in India?
Intellectuals of what movement successfully campaigned for the replacement of Literary Chinese with Mandarin Chinese?
Did Johann Bayer intentionally lie about the brightest star in Gemini?
Is Song the first of the four Southern dynasties during the Northern and Southern dynasties period?
When did Sui dynasty destroy Western Liang?
What percent of Pakistan's population spoke Urdu as their native language around 1992?
Virgo is the name in Latin for what term?
What is Squirtle known as in Japan?
Does Jigglypuff have brown eyes?
Where is French is one of two official languages?
Aside from Bengali, are there 22 other official languages in India?
Was Aquarius one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy?
What is the largest city in the Punjab? 
When is International Mother Language Day?
According to the implied king list, what is the place of Wu Ding as a king of Shang?
How can Virgo be located?
What major Chinese philosophies began in the Zhou dynasty?
What Algol-type eclipsing variable star has a period of 2 days	 8 hours? 
What is the official language of Andhra Pradesh?
In K-12 dual-language programs is Hebrew a more popular second-language option than French?
Was Mewtwo hatched from an egg?
When did spoke-wheeled chariots appear in China?
Is it true that most of Pakistani Punjabis are Shia Muslims?
In which year did the British merge the Nagpur Province with the Saugor and Nerbudda Territories to form the Central Provinces?
Is it true that only one myth attributes Scorpio to Orion?
Why was British India formed?
What feature was added to Pokémon X and Y to help evolve bulbasaur into mega venusaur?
What type of abilities does Misty's Psyduck have in the anime that is not related to its typing?
Where did Charizard rank in Complex's "The 50 Best Pokemon Up to Pokemon Crystal"?
When did Wang Tong die?
Where is the lowest-value position placed on Arabic numerals?
Does Snorlax appear in the first episode of the Pokémon anime?
Where did Mewtwo debut?
Are commanderies  larger than counties in the Han empire?
How many people speak German as a second language?
What are the official languages of Singapore?
What is Squirtle's Pokédex number? 
What is written Chinese referred to as?
Did a  Charizard appear in the live-action animated film Detective Pikachu?
Who is the father of Erigone?
Was the northern Korean Peninsula once part of the Han dynasty?
Is German an inflected language?
Does a town in Meghalaya hold the world record for most rain in a calendar month?
What video games did Charizard first appear in?
What do the Alpha and Beta Librae stars represent?
What was Li Bai known for?
Did the Emperor Yang earn the support of nomads by supporting deducational reforms?
What is matra?
Before late Babylonian times when Aries represented a ram	 what did the stars of Aries form? 
What orange giant of magnitude 3.9 completes the suite of names referring to Libra's archaic status?
Who was in control of Shang territory after the Rebellion of the Three Guards?
Does Meghalaya have many rivers?
Is Ash's training able to develop a positive connection between him and his Bulbasaur?
What language was the Quran and the Hadiths written in?
Are Ascella and Tau Sagittarii the same star?
What is Rajasthan's capital and largest city?
What is the sacred emblem of immortality for the Egyptians?
Is Durga Puja shorter than two days?
Under whom did the people of the Giao Châu Province rebel in 541?
The Saturn Nebula is small in comparison to what other planetary nebula in Aquarius?
What was the total length of surface road in Maharashtra in 2011?
Emperor Xiaowen's daughter married what Jin refugee?
How many mornarchical states was ancient Tamil Nadu organized into?
What percent of modern Spanish vocabulary is Latin?
Was the Qin dynasty formed in 400 BC?
Did the construction of the Grand Canal take heavy human lives?
What is Leo Latin for?
Why is Magikarp often overlooked by trainers?
What is the national standard dialect of Indonesian? 
Some surviving members of the Shang royal family collectively changed their surname from the ancestral name Yin to the name of their fallen dynasty, Zi, is that right? 
Are there many native speakers of Portuguese in Brazil?
How many consonant phonemes are shared by most English dialects?
What was Rajasthan's literacy rate at the Census 2011?
What Indian state succeeded the United Provinces in 1950 after India became a republic?
Which four seasons does Karnataka experience?
What religion did Xie Lingyun practice?
What is Russian notable for grammatically?
When did Pikachu first appear?
What is code switching between Urdu and English referred to as?
Which airline has Psyduck on its livery?
How can you see a wild Gyarados in Pokémon Snap?
When did Ash Ketchum’s Charizard begin to become loyal?
How many state legislatures in India have two houses?
Where was India's first port established 
Was Han dynasty before the Three Kingdoms period?
Is Sagittarius to the east of Scorpio?
When was Urdu recognised as the sole national language of Pakistan?
What planets are the most promising candidates for life in the Gliese 581 system?
Do Deshaj words belong to one of the five principal categories of Hindi words?
Who served as the 19th Chief minister of Maharashtra of the Maha Vikas Aghadi coalition until June 2022?
What ability is Mega Charizard X weak to?
Are there 105 stars brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6.5 within Libra's borders?
What is the second-most populous state in India?
Was Marathwada lost from the Nizam's Hyderabad State during the British period?
Do more people speak Spanish or Hindi?
Before Aries was reabsorbed officially, did it have a unified description?
What is the latin meaning of the name of the equatorial constellation of the zodiac between Capricornus and Pisces?
What is the top sector of SMEs in Uttar Pradesh?
What's the world's most populous city in Tang called today?
Is Rajasthan the Indian state with the largest population? 
Where was the oldest Latin texts with traces of Spanish from?
Are there Asiatic Lions in Gujurat?
When was the entire constellation of Libra considered to be a part of Scorpius?
Was the Tang dynasty a meritocracy?
What was responsible for the rebirth of culture in China under the Sui dynasty?
How many evolutions was Pikachu supposed to have originally including itself?
What are the four most spoken languages in the United States? 
Is Mewtwo always on the side of the protagonist?
Who called the Scorpius constellation "Maui's Fishhook"?
Who were said to have sent the scorpion to kill orion?
What was England named after?
How long did Zhang Qian’s travels take? 
Which constellation borders cancer on the west?
How many provinces surround the Xun Province?
What god did the Babylonians identify Sagittarius as?
What is Russian is often transliterated with?
Which form of Chinese was replaced during New Culture Movement?
Is French the most spoken language in the United States?
Was Hou Jing once a general of Eastern Wei?
Is Madhya Pradesh one of the top 3 largest Indian states by area?
Is the Thar desert located in Rajasthan?
From what set did the record highest price Charizard card come from?
Do some Magikarp know moves other than Splash, Tackle, Flail, Hydro Pump and Bounce?
Does Scorpius look like a "leaning coconut tree"?
What is Squirtle's Pokédex number?
In what age the winter solstice occurred in the constellation?
Is Pikachu had appearances in many promotional events, advertisements, or some TV series?
What are the traditional dates of the dynasty?
Did Xiongnu defeat Wang Mang's loyalist armies?
Who founded the Sui?
Who developed the Pokemon series?
Who does Ash Ketchum get his first Pokémon from?
Was leo killed by Gilgamesh?
Was Nagpur the first capital of Madhya Pradesh after Indian Independence?
Who did Islam Shah's father defeat in 1540 to rule Uttar Pradesh?
Does the Organization of American States use Spanish as an official language?
Is it true that general Gao Huan had nothing to do with Erzhu before he resisted Erzhu?
Is French one of the six official languages in the United Nations?
Is the Darjeeling Himalayan hill region in West Bengal ?
When did Pakistan gain independence?
Can the Romance languages be linguistically considered separate languages?
In 1945, Sudanese was the mother tongue of how much of the population?
What are the three main sources of growth in Gujarat's agriculture?
Bulbasaur evolves into Ivysaur and Venasaur at different levels?
Was outlawing slavery an unsuccessful reform in Xin dynasty?
Is Aquarius a constellation?
Are there typically many vowels in Mandarin dialects?
Is Indonesia the third most populous nation in the world?
Is Libra home to the Gliese 581 planetary system?
Is bombil the most popular seafood in Maharastrian cuisine?
Is Nongkhnum Island the biggest river island in Asia?
Who were Vendhar?
Was Wang Mang the  first empress, then empress dowager, and finally grand empress dowager during the reigns of the Emperors Yuan?
Why did Chen Xu leave the throne empty for more than a month?
is Indonesia the most populous nation in the world?
What is another name for the Western Ghats?
Does Switzerland have five official lanuages?
Who got the power after Queen Velu Nachi dead?
What is Johann Bayer's occupation?
What is the mass of HD 20367's orbiting planet?
What nationality were Ilustrados?
From what country did the story of the Great Square of Pegasus originate?
What is the result as CCP adopted the language policy for pushing the usage of Standard Mandarin?
What makes Uttar Pradesh have floods and droughts?
Is Libra bordered by Hydra to the northeast?
Who forced Xiao Cha to surrender to the Western Wei?
When was the Royal Spanish Academy founded?
Was bronze primarily utilitarian items?
Were act-and-board techniques used because the ships because the ships were very tall?
Does the bright star Spica makes it easy to locate Virgo?
How many cities was recovered by Liu Song in 430?
What dynasty protected the Salankayanas until 1189 CE?
Who intended to intervene in China around 10/11 AD?
When did the origins of native Chinese philosophy develop?
Is Bengali an official UN language?
Who was Leafeon designed by?
How many light-years away is the star Arietis? 
How are English nouns inflected based on word gender?
What did language contact do to Old English from the 8th to the 12th century?
Where is the last capital of the Chinese royal dynasty founded by Tang of Shang?
Is Aries a mid-sized constellation?
Is NGC 6603 in the Small Sagittarius Star Cloud?
What is Snorlax's most notable role in the Pokemon games?
What does drawing a line from a star in Taurus to a star in Leo do?
What is the capital of Tang in the present day?
The boundaries of what region are ill-defined and focus on historical accounts
What is the total number of Russian speakers in the world?
Is Mandarin the common language in southern china?
Did Sima Qian assembled the whole history of the Shang dynasty as part of his Records of the Grand Historian?
Who did Yu pass the throne to?
What is the meaning of Virgo in Latin?
What name does Sima Qian use for the Shang Dynasty?
Who usurped the throne and officially proclaimed the Xin?
Which country is the story Antenteh from?
As of the 2011 census, did more than half of the Indian population speak Bengali as their first language? 
How many exoplanet systems have been found in Aquarius?
Why did Northern Wei emperors started to embark on building its own Great Wall?
When did the Han court establish four new frontier commanderies to consolidate their control of the northwestern territory?
Are forests reserved for religious rituals under "sacred groves"?
Is Eta Aquariids the weakest meteor shower radiating from Aquarius?
Which star in the Sagittarius constellation is shared by two star systems and is 378 light-years from earth?
What pokemon did Blue exchange for the Charmander he received from his grandfather?
What is the name of the first Portuguese university? 
Does Eevee have an unstable genetic code?
Who is Jigglypuff voiced by in english?
Is cricket popular in Karnataka?
When does the Beta Taurid meteor shower occur?
As of the 2011 census, what percent of the Indian population didn't speak Hindi as their first language? 
What is the magnitude of the brightest star in Sagittarus?
Who was a candidate for imperial examinations? 
Is Charizard's Gigantamax form permanent?
Whose grandson ordered his edicts engraved in the rock at Girinagar?
Sagittarius contains the brightest visible region of the Milky Way
What is the Latin translation of Pisces?
How many phenomes does the German consonant system have? 
In what region of Maharashtra are the Melghat Tiger Reserve, Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve, Umred Karhandla Wildlife Sanctuary, the Nagzira wildlife sanctuary, and Navegaon National Park located?
To meet Chinese government's goal, how much more in percentage of Chinese population should speak Standard Mandarin between 2020 and 2025?
Can Virgo be easily found through its brightest star called Spica?
Who is Cao Pi?
Are clusters of four consonants common in Russian?
Is the rural sex ratio of Meghalaya higher than the national ratio?
Did John Gilchrist have a role in the foundation of University College London?
Was spanish an official language of Phillippines in 1600?
What is the 15th largest Indian state by population?
In the founding myth of the Shang dynasty described by Sima Qian, whose wife was the woman who miraculously gave birth to Xie?
Is West Bengal subtropical when the elevation is 4,000 feet?
Can Mewtwo teleport in movies?
When is the sun in the Cancer constellation?
Does Gemini lie between Taurus to the west and Aquarius to the east?
What is May's Eevee evolved into in the episode "Espeon, Not Included"?
What became the main staple crop during the Tang dynasty?
Is Leo an astrological sign of August?
Does all Mandarin-spearking areas have the same tone distribution?
What Pokemon games did Eevee first appear in?
What is the fourth most populous nation in the world?
Is rap a Gujarati folk music?
Which Chinese dynasty unified the Northern and Southern dynasties?
Is Wartortle the last evolution of Squirtle?
What season is the Virgo constellation most prominent?
Does Modern Standard Arabic have five pure vowels?
What industry contributes the most to the low unemployment rate of Karanataka?
Is the state's capital important to India's financial and commercial?
When was the Chen dynasty created?
Who was Jolteon designed by?
In addition to war, what did Shang also practiced?
How many starter Pokémon were in Pokémon Go?
Which state cricket team won the Ranji Trophy most number of times?
Do Anglophones exist on every continent?
Is the only city in India to have trams as a mode of transport located in eastern India? 
Who is resurrected after the fighting stops?
Who is Ibn Jinni of Mosul?
What is the second-most spoken native language in the world?
Why Uttar Pradesh is important in modern Indian history?
In 2011, were there more males than females in Meghalaya's population? 
How many Nigerians speak English?
What instrument is folk music in West Bengal often accompanied by?
Squirtle's Japanese voice actor, Rikako Aikawa, was replaced by who for the English dub?
What Mesopotamian god has influenced the name of Spica?
Was the Chera dynasty the first prominent kingdom based in Kerala?
Where is the Tang capital?
Is sanqu poetry based on Old Mandarin?
Was the Tang economy enriched by the trade it conducted?
Was Liu Yu born into rich family?
Which Indian state is shravanabelagola located in?
What is Gangam Sudhir Kumar Reddy's native language?
Was Zhou dynasty (1046–256 BC) the verified earliest Chinese dynasty after 20th Century?
Is Capricornus bordered by Piscis?
What is the ability of Mega Charizard Y?
In terms of what was Mewtwo the strongest in the original games?
Is the design of Bulbasaur inspired by a Dicynodont?
Are there over 50 million native speakers of Urdu in India and Pakistan together? 
Was the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics flourishing in the 15th century?
What was the name of Sima Fei's wife?
Which video game did Psyduck make its debut appearance in the Pokemon series?
Does Indonesian have the same vocabulary as Malaysian Malay?
Which script is Spanish written in?
What state in India is the largest producer of eggs?
Who states that Charizard was expected to be popular with North American audiences because of their preference for strong, powerful characters?
What is a compact Shapley class II cluster?
In 1880, what script did Sir Ashley Eden order the court should exclusively use?
Was bronze smelting not directed by the nobility?
Who designed Squirtle?
What constellation is Libra south of?
Who founded the Jin dynasty?
What is magnitude of Messier 80?
Is Bulbasaur a starter in Pokemon Red and Blue?
How many surviving works does Wang Tong have?
How many grammatical genders does German have?
The duck Pokémon was often released by accident by which character?
What is the nickname of the bright star in Scorpius with a reddish hue?
How many speakers of Russian were there in 2010 across the world?
What is the clever and descriptive name of Psyduck that was created for western audiences?
Was native Chinese philosophy fully developed in the 6th century BC?
Who founded the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
What animal does Charizard have a remarkable resemblance to?
What is the fastest growing European language?
Who was Fort Kochi was established by in 1664?
Where did the Jigglypuff's Japanese name derives from
Does Meghalaya followe a patriarchal society?
Who's success in stopping the flooding increased agricultrual production?
Which place has yielded the earliest known body of Chinese writing?
Is Castor or Pollux brighter?
Is Lagoon Nebula a well-known nebula?
Was Yang Jian the regent to the Northern Zhou court in 577?
When was the rump state of Western Liang conquered by the Sui dynasty.
Does Scorpius contain "rival of Mars" and "the forehead"?
Who abandoned his position as Agrarian Master Chinese pinyin N ngsh?
Where is the Tang capital?
Since it appeared in the Pokémon series, did Jigglypuff receive generally negative reception?
What classic, Ming-era novel retells the story of the war between Shang and Zhou?
What star is the brightest in this constellation?
Did teaching Urdu in school create new Urdu speakers?
Who succeeded Shun as emperor?
Who propably painted the Gathering of Kings?
What is the most widely spoken language of Bangladesh?
What is Western Sahara formerly known was?
Is French a Romance language of the Indo-European family?
What case is used when the pronoun is the subject of a finite clause?
Is Tarf a binary star system?
What is Charmander known as in Japan?
Is Luoyang in the west of Chang'an?
What is the brightest visible region of the Milky Way?
What is the classification of the learning difficulty for native English speakers?
What color is Pikachu?
Was Longmen Caves built mid-to-late fifth century?
Do we know a limit to how big Jigglypuff can grow?
What were the traditional dates of the dynasty?
Is Charmander a well-liked Pokémon?
What is the integrated magnitude of the Omega Nebula?
When was Urdu was chosen as an official language of Pakistan?
What magazine praised Mewtwo as a character with “philosophical depth” and for serving as “an adversary of almost infinite power and genuine malice” that the anime series has been lacking? 
Who identified that patients with diabetes had an excess of sugar in their urine?
What shape do the bright stars of Libra in the nearest OB association form?
Does English belong to the West Germanic group of the Germanic languages?
What borders Kerala to the west?
Which is the second most spoken language in Meghalaya?
Is Maharashtra the the third-most populous state in India
What country did Spanish originate from?
How much did the rate of electricity access in Rajasthan increase from 2015 to 2019?
Who is the son of Aphrodite?
How many subdivisions did astronomer Johannes Hevelius in his Firmamentum Sobiescianum divide the constellation Pisces into?
Is Sagittarius between Scorpius and Ophiuchus?
Did Zu Chongzhi live during the Liu Song period?
Who succeeded Emperor Min?
Who was Artemis' mother?
Does 90% of Meghalaya's population depend entirely on agriculture for their livelihood?
What is the radius of HD 210277?
Who ruled modern-day Junagadh from 322 BCE to 294 BCE?
Do May and Ash's bulbasaurs have different voice actors?
What move does Snorlax gain in Gigantamax form?
During the reign of which emperor did the Sui dynastic invade Goguryeo with massive army?
Kerala is home to what percent of India's population?
What does Munchlax evolve into?
Would the peerage ranks below the royal ranks never take power from his nobles and centralize the state?
How long do the southwest monsoons last?
What did Javanese fail to do for Indonesia after its independence?
Was the source of Malabar peppers vulnerable to pirates?
Do Jaintias form the largest tribal group in Meghalaya?
What year did scholars notice "dragon bones" being sold with archaic characters?
Which group of people call the Capricornus constellation the Roofing Towers?
What appearance does the English name of Jigglypuff relate to?
How many days long is Durga Puja?
If Pikachu Peak has an elevation of 5000 m, can it be found in Meghalaya?
Can Portugal be referred to as a Lusophone?
What does Aquarius mean in Latin?
When did Charmander first appear in Pokemon Indigo League?
What is the official language of West Bengal?
What site ranked Squirtle the 46th best Pokémon ever?
At 2014 FIFA World Cup, was there more than one Pokémon chosen as Japan's mascot?
Is the the Bay of Bengal in West Bengal?
Which king did the Han court not replace by 196 BC?
Do western scholars believe that settlements like Sanxingdui belong to the Shang dynasty?
Portuguese portuguesa is a western Romance language of what language family?
Is Capricornus a faint constellation?
Is West Bengal's capital the seventh-largest city in India?
Which star's system contains a planet 7.5 times that of Jupiter?
Why has Kerala had the highest road accident rate in the country?
Did Artemis and her mother send a scorpion to kill Orion in one version of myths?
When was Messier 80 discovered?
When did the British East India Company choose Urdu as the language to replace Persian across northern India?
What constellation is east of the constellation that means ram in Latin?
Is West Bengal the second-most visited tourist destination in India?
Who once called Portuguese "the sweet and gracious language"?
What was Belize formerly known as?
Who is the daughter of Icarius of Athens?
In which year did the location of the Sun on the first day of summer move from Gemini into Taurus?
In what city is the Bombay Stock Exchange located?
Is French the third most spoken language in the United States?
Is Omega Sagittarii a part of the asterism Terebellum?
Was 1745 the first year that the open cluster discovered?
What did Maharana Pratap do to become the most Rajasthan?
French is the official language of how many countries across multiple continents?
Asian governments spoke Portuguese in the 16th century
Why is the central area of the Lagoon Nebula shaped like an hourglass?
Did Indian independence movement create a division between the rich and the middle and lower classes?
Which year did Emperor Wu die?
What Pokémon does Pikachu evolve into?
How many official languages are there of NATO?
Did Xiao Tui become the emperor in 553?
Have Stone Age tools been excavated in West Bengal?
Has Snorlax received generally positive reception from the media?
Does the Capricornus constellation contain any spiral galaxies?
Did the Shang practice human sacrifices?
What animal is Capricornus in Indian astronomy?
Is Kolkata a larger city than Asansol?
Was Pokémon gold and Silver released after Pokémon Red and Green?
What color is Pikachu's ears?
What was the city whose remains where discovered in 1999 across the Huan river?
The Pleiades and the Hyades are visible to the naked eye.
Did the Yin dynasty traditionally succeed the Xia dynasty?
Did Northern Wei build more than 2000 li defence line in 423?
What is the second most common religion in Indian Punjab?
Why is Capricornus faint?
What is the Sachsenspiegel?
Did the Reformists in the Han dynasty promote an aggressive foreign policy?
In which year was the Museum of the Portuguese Language partially destroyed by a fire?
Do people in the LGBTQ community in Tamil Nadu have more rights compared to citizens of other Indian states?
Which occupation does the Koli dance represent?
What is the second-brightest star in Gemini?
During what season did Emperor Taiwu begin to attack the Northern Yan dynasty?
Does Leo only contain one galaxy?
When were all remote villages in West Bengal electrified?
When was Kerala formed?
What was the language of the sultanate of Brunei and of future Malaysia in 1945?
Did Chen Baxian display a relic believed to be a Buddha's tooth and hold a major Buddhist festival?
Did Emperor Xiaowen introduce changes that eventually led to the dynasty moving its capital from Datong to Luoyang in 494?
How far from Earth is the system that a wide-set red dwarf star is a part of?
Of what two words is "Psyduck" a combination of?
What Mesopotamian god associated Virgo with fertility?
Do the Jodhpur Airport and the Kota Airport both serve civilians who want to go to Delhi?
Does Misty have a psyduck in the Pokemon anime?
What is the most spoken language in the European Union?
How many European Union citizens speak French?
How many districts are in the sixth-largest Indian state by area?
On what date to the Delta Aquariids first peak?
Did most Sangam literature deal with themes of hubris?
Did Northern Wei unified northern China before broke out with Liu Song dynasty
What period saw the further displacement of Latin by German as the primary language of courtly proceedings and, increasingly, of literature in the German states?
Who began the magazine Pujangga Baru?
Was Dong Zhongshu a Confucianism scholar?
The Shang dynasty succeeded which dynasty?
Are there people in Andhra Pradesh who practice Buddhism?
Did Mughul rule come after the Gupta Empire in the timeline of Punjab?
Whose clone is the friend of Mewtwo who dies in the Birth of Mewtwo: Pokémon Radio Drama?
Where did Lana acquire Sandy?
What does "Libra" stand for in Latin?
Prior to Indian independence, what was the main political party in Tamil Nadu?
What dynasty is Liang preceded by?
Where is Scorpius located?
What is the capital of Madhya Pradesh?
Who's birthday is celebrated as Hindi Day?
After Indian independence, were the princely states and Jagirs of the Deccan States Agency merged into Andhra State
When was Emperor Wen's first year of reign?
Did Li Rong use Language Atlas of China?
Is Bhartiya Janta Party a ruling party in Rajasthan?
Where is Urdu primarily spoken?
Is learning Urdu required in Meghalaya schools?
Is the Sombrero Galaxy part of the Virgo cluster?
What is Bulbasaur's name based off of?
Which state is the third-largest state by area in terms of land area in India?
What is the capital and largest city in Madhya Pradesh?
When was Rajasthan formed?
Was Castor mortal?
Does the star 70 Virionis have a planet?
As of 2011, the Sun appears in what constellation from June 21 to July 20?
Was Emperor Yang of Sui related to Li Yuan?
How many Starter Pokémon are in Pokémon Yellow?
Which pokemon did GamesRadar describe as "hands-down one of the coolest Pokémon out there"?
What is the second-fast growing European Language? 
Who was the first recorded king of Bengal?
Did the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence yield the earliest known body of Chinese writing?
In which Indian state is the "Chicken's Neck" found?
Did the Shang invent musical instruments, observe comets, hunt animals, and practice human sacrifice?
Is Hindi the official language of Meghalaya?
In what century did Indonesia's commerce relationship with China start? 
What is the official language of Kerala?
The Han dynasty inherited the ban liang coin type from which dynasty? 
Is Virgo most prominent in the autumn sky?
How many countries are a part of the "German Sprachraum"? 
What is the population of Madhya Pradesh?
What description did the New York Times give to Psyduck
Where is Hindi adopted as the third official court language?
Is Bengali-Assamese script an abugida?
Did Emperor Yang completed the construction of the Grand Canal that directly linked Chang'an to the Yellow River?
When was Speak Mandarin Campaign launched?
What is the chinese word for the Xia dynasty?
Is Cherrapunji a tourist destination in north-west of India?
Does English share innovations with Swedish?
How large is Uttar Pradesh?
What inflected, pluricentric language is the second most commonly used scientific language?
Is Bengali a head-final language?
Is Mandarin the official language of Taiwan?
Arabic is an important language to what religion?
Did the Yin dynasty followed by the Western Zhou dynasty?
In Detective Pikachu, is Lucy Stevens male?
What is the Japanese name for Jigglypuff?
What Pokémon evolves into Snorlax?
Is Indonesian more popular the Malaysian Malay internationally?
Did Emperor encourage low taxation?
Can Cancer be seen with the naked eye from a city?
Is Sufism well-established in Punjab?
Is the East Bengal Club located in West Bengal?
What changes in Hindi characterised the transition from Middle Indo-Aryan?
What territories did Modu Chanyu control by the end of his reign?
When is Hindi day celebrated?
Have Stone Age tools been found in Rajasthan?
When did English achieve party with french as a language of diplomacy?
Was Shang the latest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
Into how many dialect regions can English in England be divided?
What is the vast trade network known as 
In how many Shang oracle bone inscriptions was King Wu Ding's most famous consort mentioned?
Who were the local aristocrat clans of the south often at odds with?
Why Portuguese speakers are found around the world?
When were  17,000 Bok globules discovered in the Lagoon Nebula?
What is the earliest form of English called?
What is a factor causing the dialects in and around the Nantong area to have more than 4 tones?
Did the British govern northern Maharashtra as a part of the Bombay Presidency?
Why is the belief that Hindi is the national language of India a source for friction?
Where is the newspaper La Syrie headquartered?
How many southern dynasties were there during the Northern and Southern dynasties period?
Where was the Sui dynasty founded?
Does Librae can be considered as a single star system?
Was Eevee's second appearance in the anime in The Battling Eevee Brothers?
Is Karnataka meteorologically divided into two zones?
Is Taurus in the Northern Hemisphere's winter sky?
Was German the language of commerce in the Habsburg Empire prior to the mid-nineteenth century?
How many scheduled languages does the Republic of India have?
Where is the Milky Way at its densest?
What language is spoken by all educated Haitians?
Who introduced "equal-field" policy in the North Wei regime?
Who portrayed Jigglypuff in the live-action musical Pokemon Live!?
Are Poorams and Onams the names of festivals held in Kerala?
Is the Sombrero galaxy part of the Virgo cluster?
Did Operation Polo occur before or after the British Raj?
Was Aramaic ever more widely spoken than English is now?
What religion is Arabic commonly associated with?
Why did Yang Jian withdraw his forces?
When did the Three Kingdoms period end?
How did the piece of fruit help Jigglypuff?
What percent of modern Spanish vocabulary is derived from Latin?
What are the chapters of the Quran called?
Is Jigglypuff one of the Pokemon that appears in the Pokemon: Detective Pikachu film?
Who replaced the Chen Dynasty?
What character was used by psychiatrists to empower traumatized children?
What does modern China’s majority ethnic group refer themselves as?
Were the Gallaeci pre-Roman inhabitants of Portugal?
Can Magikarp learn the moves Splash and Tackle from generations 2 to 8?
What is HIP 14810 orbited by?
When can Capricornus be best seen from Europe?
Does Snorlax weigh less than 1,000 pounds?
Does Afrikaans belong to the same language branch as Gothic?
Are Makara and Roofing Towers different names for the same constellation?
What state did Hyderabad become the new capital of?
Is Gokaka India's tallest waterfall?
Was Yuan Hao the Prince of Wei when he surrendered his territories to Liang?
Who voiced Mewtwo's younger self in the anime adaptation?
How many constellations were decribed by Ptolemy?
Is the economy of Karnataka in the top three among Indian states?
Which river flooded when Gun was appointed by Emperor Yao to stop the flooding?
When did Emperor Wu died?
When did Huhanye Chanyu submit to the Han?
Is Arabic related to languages in the subgroups of the Semitic language group?
Did Squirtle ever evolve in the anime?
After Shang's collapse, Did Zhou's rulers scattered "Yin diehards" (殷頑) throughout Zhou territory?
Has the literacy rate in Rajasthan ever been above the  national average?
What negated the effects of Stealth Rock?
What kind of language do Punjabi people speak?
Was Charizard beaten by Mewtwo?
Where is the capital of Meghalaya?
Was Yingying's Biography became the basis for plays in Chinese opera by the Yuan dynasty?
Which character owned a Bulbasaur in Magical Pokémon Journey?
What did Portraits of Periodical Offering of Liang depict?
Who are the two main designers of Pikachu?
Did the Satavahana King Gautamiputra conquer all of Malwa in the 2nd century?
Where did the English language first evolve?
Where does the June full moon appear?
Which colonizer nation built The Shettihalli Rosary Church in India?
Did Antenteh refuse the wish offered by the two magical fish?
Who created Eevee?
In which battle did the Han restorationist armies completedly defeat the Wang's loyalist armies?
Does Eevee has more than 5 evolutions?
Which company did Atsuko Nishida work for?
German is most similar to other languages within what language branch?
What important figurative device was introduced to poetry by the Quran?
How many languages does Gulzar write in?
Did Emperor Wen and Emperor Yang both involved in the construction of the Grand Canal?
Who is known for calculating pi to seven decimal places?
Is Mandarin the second largest of the seven Chinese dialect groups?
Apart from hydrogen, what is the other element found within galaxies of Leo?
How did Yu help increase agricultural production?
Meghalaya is predominantly what kind of economy?
How many Pokémon designs were there for the first generation of Pokémon games?
Does The state of Bihar allow the sale of alcohol? 
Charizard  can breathe intense flames that can melt any material and torch a weaker foe.
What is the largest zodiac constellation?
Who allied with Western Wei in order to eliminate Xiao Ji?
Members of which office consider Psyduck their favorite character?
How many Spanish speakers live the United states?
Is only a minority of Meghalaya forested? 
Where is Punjab?
What lead to native speakers may have Sanskrit consonant clusters which do not exist in native Hindi, causing difficulties in pronunciation?
For what popular sport are there three stadiums in Madhya Pradesh?
Which Chinese dynasty is also called Yin dynasty?
When was the end of the Old High German period?
When did the Maratha Navy cease to exist?
Is it true that Magikarp can only learn three moves by leveling?
When do the Epsilon Geminids peak? 
Is Beta Librae considered to represent the weighing pans?
What is the earliest hypothesized identification of Taurus?
Does regional variation in spoken Bengali constitute a dialect continuum?
How many prominent forms and characters is Hindi literature roughly divided into?
What is the most populated state in India?
How far away from Earth is NGC 5897?
How many stars in the Leo constellation are in the first or second magnitude?
What constellation is Libra bordered by to the east? 
What are the three standardized variants of German?
Does over 99% of the Chinese population currently speak Mandarin?
Which kind of currency did the Xin Dynasty replace from?
Which star in the Sagittarius constellation is the second brightest star and is 260 light years away?
Which poet was viewed as a anti-traditional rebel?
Which is a double star in the Gemini constellation whose primary is a Cepheid variable star and is 220,000 times the size of the Sun?
Which language family is German in?
How many constellations border Libra?
Who designed Bulbasaur?
Is Iberian related to the Latin language? 
Was the Great Vowel Shift a chain shift?
Was Fort William College established before the Lady Brabourne College?
In what year was the act that incorporated Hyderabad and Bombay into the Mysore state passed?
What is the capital of Meghalaya?
Did Psyduck made its first appearance in Pokémon Red and Blue?
What function does the Ruassian lanugage department have without internet connection in the Havana State University?
Is Aries a large-sized constellation?
Does "Hindi-Urdu" share the same meaning with "Hindustani"?
When was the Iberian Peninsula conquered by Germanic peoples of the Migration Period?
Is the dynasty founded by Tang of Shang the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
Who first identifitied that patients with dabetes had an excess of  sugar in their urine?
Which city became a center of the Ismaili sect of Islam after the Umayyad caliphate conquered the region in 711 AD?
Did Pushyagupta live over 2000 years ago?
Who created Charizard?
Does Aquarius have any stars more than magnitude 3?
Did Ptolemy catalogue 36 stars?
What is the official language of Meghalaya? 
Was the Tuoba chief granted the title of the Prince of Dai in 315?
Which province was a new provinced established in 1901?
The Koch dynasty in northern Bengal flourished after the death of which Emperor and Governor?
Where can you buy a cast necklaces inspired by Psyduck?
What is a special group of Pokémon that are very rare and usually very powerful called?
Is the Taiwanese Standard Mandarin very different from that of the Mainland?
Which dynasty did the Houjing Disturbance cause the downfall of?
When was Emperor Yan assasinated?
Does Gujarat come under the northen Railway Zone of the Indian Railways?
In the first-millennium BC texts known as the Astronomical Diaries, was part of Pisces called DU.NU.NU?
How many main streets intersected with the avenue connecting the Mingde Gates and the central administrative city?
What two stars take up most of Gemini?
Who calls this constellation Roofing Towers?
Is Logan Paul a Youtuber?
Is the name of Gujarat derived from a dynasty from over 1000 years ago?
Who founded dynasty Sui?
In year 2014, which country was accepted as a member of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries?
Who wrote the book The Strangers's East Indian Guide to the Hindoostanee Or Grand Popular Language of India (improperly Called Moors)
What does Venusaur evolve from?
Is Leo the most recently recognized constellation?
How many phases of English were mentioned in the passage?
Which dialect is the Standard Mandarin Chinese based on?
What was the second dynasty to rule over Uttar Pradesh sequentially between 1206 and 1526?
Do national highways make up the majority of Andhra Pradesh's road network?
Where are multimillion-dollar Bollywood productions filmed?
Was infant Zeus' father dangerous?
What is the further evolution of Squirtle?
Could a native Bengali word have three consonants in a row?
What makes Pikachu popular amongst children?
What disturbance ruined the Liang dynasty?
Where was India's first port established?
Who founded the Liu Song dynasty?
Squirtle has appeared in which Pokemon movie?
Did Liu Xiu become the emperor in Chang’an?
Where can Magikarp be found?
What percent of Bangladeshis use Bengali as their first language?
What are the three types of cross that Mewtwo has been likened to?
Who established The Han dynasty?
When would one use a compund consisting of six words in German?
After evolving to what form did Charizard's personality in the anime start to cause issues for Ash?
When does Orion hunt every year?
Is Meghalaya the most literate state in India?
Was Agra ever the capital of Uttar Pradesh?
What was the dynasty conquered by Zhou?
Did Pei Ji participate in Emperor Xuan's campaign against the Northern Qi in spring 573? 
What kind of grammatical construct is more common in Urdu when compared with Hindi?
What is the official language of Rajasthan?
Will New Horizons always be inside the Solar System?
Does Uttar Pradesh have a railway network?
What Indian state has the most number of biotechnology firms?
Is German the fifth most spoken language in terms of native and second language speakers?
What is Psyduck's Japanese name?
What is Snorlax's Japanese name?
Is Catalan the same language as Spanish?
Who was a descendant of the Xia dynasty Kings through Shao Kang?
Why was Malay never a dominant language in Indonesia at the start of the 1600s?
Is Urdu relatable to Persian?
Which language is derived from Arabic but uses Latin letters?
Which of the nearest open clusters to Earth are in Taurus?
What was the figure of Capricornus called in the Society Islands?
How many days does the sun take to pass through Virgo?
What group of Germanic languages does English belong to?
What are the twins that the Gemini constellation is named for?
Is the Middle English often arbitrarily defined as beginning with the conquest of England by William the Conqueror in 1066?
Is Tamil Nadu coastal?
Under capricornus's modern boundaries, what constellations are next to it?
Was Chen Daotan honor his father as an emperor?
Where was Amul formed?
What country did Spanish originate from?
What is the evolved form of Squirtle into Wartortle called?
In the online phenomenon known as Twitch Plays Pokemon, did Charmander go into the wild?
Is Hindi the most-spoken language in the world?
How many verified exoplanets are there orbiting the stars in Virgo?
Is Gemini one of the 88 modern constellations today?
Can Charizard torch a weaker foe?
Why did China's first imperial dynasty collapse?
How many hours of immersion instruction are needed to achieve intermediate fluency according to the standards of the Defense Language Institute?
Has Magikarp appeared in Pokémon Emerald?
What was the chief building material during the Han dynasty? 
Is West Bengal's capital the fifth-largest city in India?
How many stars of naked eye visibility does Gemini contain.
Do planets orbit star?
Can another Pokémon besides pikachu naturally learn  Thunderbolt?
Did Northen Qi support Xiao Fangzhi as the emperor?
What is the earliest period where people lived in Meghalaya?
In the first generation of Pokemon games, could Magikarp learn 3 moves?
In which Pocket Monsters games is Mewtwo the genetic recombination of Mew's DNA?
What vegetable and animal is Bulbasaur and its evolutions based on?
What is Easter Island's traditional language?
What makes Jigglypuff's singing unique?
Is West Bengal the most populous state in India?
Is Pikachu a major mascot for Nintendo?
Which Nebula is located 5000 light-years from the earth and has a pink-hue?
What period of the Portuguese language directly followed the Proto-Portuguese period?
How long did Tibetans capture Chang'an during the An Shi Rebellion?
How many members are in Gujarat's  Legislative Assembly?
Were industrial visionaries important in the development of Karnataka's manufacturing and industrial base?
When did the Babylonians record Capricornus?
As of the 2011 census, did more than a quarter of the Indian population speak Hindi as their first language? 
Did Taizong build upon the Sui legal code?
Is Sagittarius one of the constellations of the zodiac and is located in the Southern celestial hemisphere.
What did the Champans ride into battle against the Sui?
Who killed Jigglypuff while playing Pokemon GO?
Why did Emperor Wen convert to Buddhism?
Who founded the Tang dynasty?
Does The state of Mizoram allow the sale of alcohol? 
Did Wu Zetian entere Emperor Gaozong's court as the highly consort?
Where did Portuguese originate?
Which language replaced the Literary Chinese during New Culture Movement?
Do children work in Punjab?
What country borders Uttar Pradesh?
What is theorized that the reason why the special Eevee owned by Chloe Cerise cannot evolve is related to its hesitancy in making important decisions?
Do the terms "Galician-Portuguese",  "Old Portuguese" and "Old Galician" refer to the same medieval language? 
Who is Squirtle voiced by in English?
Are all modern Punjabis Sunni Muslim?
Why did Li Shimin kill two of his brothers?
Did Gujarat once have one the most important ports in the world?
What are the countries of origin of the "luso-" prefix?
Where do the majority of Spanish speakers live?
Was there a securely dated event in Chinese history before the start of the Gonghe Regency in 841 BC?
Was it unexpected for Indonesian to be choosen as the national language of Indonesia?
Except for Jolteon and Flareon, who were the Eeveelutions designed by?
Did Emperor Wen defeat Northern Wei in 452?
Which dynasty made a total end to the Liang dynasty
Which country was the first European power to arrive in Gujarat?
Is the Shang dynasty the earliest dynast of traditional Chinese history supported by archaeological evidence?
Is Karnataka home to Kannadigas?
Is the March equinox is currently located in Pisces?
What is another name for Libra in arabic?
What is the metro rail system in the city of Kochi called?
Is there a large variety of orchids in Meghalaya?
Is Portuguese the second-most spoken European language in the world?
Which language did all Romance languages descend from?
What was the capital when the Chaulukya dynasty ruled Gujarat? 
What modern day city was identified as the last capital city of the Shang dynasty?
Was Cao Wei ended before Eastern Wu?
Why did Jigglypuff draw on the audience's faces?
What trade was Kerala known for?
Had Xiao Bo been killed by his own generals is 506?
Is African American Vernacular English non-rhotic?
Where is the Sui dynasty capital?
What happened to Shang clans after the dynasty's collapse?
Who wrote the Records of the Grand Historian?
Is the service sector bigger than the production sector in Maharashtra?
Which star in the Sagittarius constellation is the brightest and has a magnitude of 1.85?
What became a major influence in Chinese culture?
Is Messier 65 part of Leo Triplet?
Is it true that most of the grammatical and typological features of Spanish are shared with the other Romance languages?
Were the Merseburg Charms originally written using a printing press?
What percentage of the EU speaks French?
Is Charmander featured in Super Smash Bros.?
Which country has the largest population of native Spanish speakers?
How many years passed between the two renamings of Topeka?
Does Mount Everst belongs in Rajasthan?
Which constellation lies between Virgo and Scorpius?
Were Dutch colonizers successful in spreading the Dutch language in Indonesia
Is present day Meghalaya part of Assam? 
Is Gujarat the largest Indian state by  area?
Who was Hou Jing rebellion with in 548?
What are the two well-known star clouds within Sagittarius?
In which parts of India is Urdu spoken?
Is the Association of Spanish Language Academies the entity which regulates the Spanish language?
How many separate words does Bengali have?
Was Indonesian the most widely spoken local language when it was adopted?
Who first recorded Cancer?
Tang dynasty is preceded by which dynasty?
From whom did Wang Mang learn to rule?
Who created the Pokémon franchise?
What is Charizard called in Japan?
When did Bulbasaur made its video game debut?
Who is the founder of the Chen dynasty?
Who calculated the traditional dates of the dynasty during the Han dynasty?
When did the British annex the Punjab?
Is Mumbai the capital of Madhya Pradesh?
Was this a period that cutted off the country?
What is the brightest star in the Taurus constellation?
Andhras are also known as what?
Who god did the Romans associate with Virgo?
Which Chen dynasty emperor married Liu Jingyan and had a son Chen Shubao?
How far is the Messier 67 from Earth?
When does Orion hunt?
Does Psyduck have a small tuft of black hair at the top of its head?
Did Magikarp appear flopping around in a dried-up lake in more than one video game?
Did the Confucian scholars support Emperor Wen's reforms?
Is Mewtwo taller than 2 meters tall?
What was the capital of the Eastern Zhou?
What enables Squirtles to swim at high speeds?
Which state has the tallest single-tiered waterfall in India?
At what level does Charmander evolve into Charmeleon?
What is the largest city of the state that has Bhopal as its capital?
In the anime, who besides Ash trained Bulbasaur?
What does Psyduck evolve into?
Was Gorochu ever created?
Was Mewtwo a modified clone in the games?
Which place in northeast China received signnificant settlements by Han Chinese before 18th Century?
What is the variety with the most speakers?
Who brought several changes to the legal system, built modern means of transport, improved mass education, standardised the Marathi language, and introduced mass media to Maharashtra?
Did Misty catch a Psyduck deliberately in Hypno's Naptime?
Which constellation did the December solstice take place in before Sagittarius?
Is the Jin dynasty well known for the greenish celadon porcelain wares and Jar designs with animal or Buddhist figures?
What period of the history of English was characterized by inflectional simplification?
What region absorbed the Mughal Empire in 1576?
When was the common Western depiction of Aquarius established?
What percentage of tourists in Maharashtra are from other countries?
Who discovered the Trifid Nebula?
The Nibelungenlied is an important work from which period/epoch? 
Is Kerala the 21st largest Indian state by area?
What was the name of the first episode of the Pokémon anime in which Eevee appeared?
What does Pikachu have on their cheeks?
How many pronouns meaning "you" does Spanish have?
What caused Liu Ziye to kill the three sons of one of his aunts?
Is there considerable variations among the German dialects?
When was Pluto discovered?
Do Indonesian and Malaysian have differences in vocabulary?
What is the Kerala local festival conducted by temples on annual basis that take the idol out on a procession with a elephant?
What does a player need for Venusaur to evolve into Mega Venusaur?
Are all the 88 modern constellations today as recognizable as Leo?
Which constellation represents Zeus transformed?
Who discovered a II-P supernova in the outer regions of M74?
Are there many large Portuguese immigrant communities all over the world?
The rivers referenced in the meaning of Punjab are tributaries of which river?
What is Jigglypuff known as in Japan?
In Detective Pikachu, was the Eevee evolved into a Vaporeon?
When was Yanshi Shang City discovered?
Where are the ruins of the Indus Valley Civilization at Kalibangan and Balathal located?
According to the Sri Lankan chronicle Mahavams, what did Prince Vijaya name Lanka after conquering it?
What is Snorlax's most notable role in the Pokemon games?
Which move in Super Smash Bros. appearances changes most?
What cities were the written standard developed in?
Does Sagittarius have one singular identity in Greek mythology?
How many fingers did Ken Sugimori draw for Charmander on each hand?
Which pokemon is known as the balloon pokemon?
What is the popultation of Meghalaya?
Who is the author of New Songs of Yutai?
Portuguese has more than 10 vowels (including oral and nasal vowels) 
How much was "thicc Charizard" sold as an NFT for?
What was the gross state domestic product of West Bengal in 2020-21 in US$?
Is Mewtwo a real create?
Is it believed that the Shang buried their kings with accompanying people because of the belief in the afterlife?
Since when have people lived in Mehalaya?
Is Tatsam pronounced the same as classical Sanskrit?
Is the Daytime Arietid meteor shower is present on May 24?
When did Urdu and English replace Persian as the official languages in northern parts of India?
What Spanish dialect has the most speakers?
Does Tamil Nadu have periods of dry weather?
What Pokémon evolves into Charizard?
Is the Rarh region not in West Bengal?
What is the three Meteorological zones of Karnataka?
Who was the executive producer of Mewtwo Strikes Back?
Was Cancer first recorded in Almagest?
Which open cluster is YBP 1194 in?
Who is the father of Aurangzeb?
What was the language of commerce and government in the Habsburg Empire?
What country was accepted as a member of the CPLP in July 2014?
Who voices Jigglypuff in the Pokemon: Detective Pikachu film
What did Emperor Wen establish that led to a large agricultural surplus and rapid population growth?
Are there more second-language or first-language speakers of English?
Was Uttar Pradesh inhabited 70000 years ago?
Are there other Pokémon than Mewtwo that was born?
How old was Liu Zixun when he died?
What type of Pokémon does Psyduck evolve into?
Is Rajasthan connected with the main cities of India by rail?
Who is known as the "Sleeping Pokémon"?
Is Mandarin sometimes referred to as "Northern Chinese"? 
When did the Wei dynast officialy end?
Did Xiongnu invade China successfully around 10/11 AD?
Did Emperor Wu influence the conflicts between the Han dynasty and Xiongnu?
Who was the king when Uttar Pradesh became the heartland of the empire? 
What are German speakers called? 
Were marriages highly ritualized amongst the wealthy in the Han era?
What is Gujarat's official language?
What is the French for 70 in Rwanda and Burundi?
When did the Great Vowel Shift begin?
Is Alpha Leonis visible in binocular?
What are the only two moves Magikarp can learn by level in the first generation of Pokémon games?
Where was the Koh-i-Noor mined from?
In which year was the evidence of two Earth-mass exoplanets orbtiting Teegarden's star announced?
Why does Maharashta have low agricultural productivity?
Does Aries contains several stars with extrasolar planets?
Is Portuguese the fastest-growing European language?
What is the second most common religion in Gujarat?
In which year did Sui dynasty absorb Chen dynasty?
Is Messier 30 contained in the capricornus?
What year was the Amiri Press first established?
Who paid tribute to the Liang in 547?
What dynasty was replaced by the Gupta empire with the conquest of Gujarat by Chandragupta Vikramaditya?
Was the music video "Electric" released before the film Pokemon Detective Pikachu?
Does Maharastra provide legal protection to its tiger population?
Is Magikarp a fish?
When did Chen Geng become emperor?
What is Charmander known as in Japan?
What are the main languages of instruction in Pakistan?
What does the red circular pouches on Pikachus' cheeks spark with? 
Are all bus companies in West Bengal privately owned?
Would I be able to see Daytime Arietids without special equipments?
Is the founding myth of the Yin dynasty described by Sima Qian in the Annals of the Yin?
What is the most common way to adopt national language by other post-colonial states?
How do you obtain the starters from Pokémon Red and Blue in Pokémon Yellow?
How many official lanuages does Pakistan have?
Who is Pikachu's owner? 
What script is Hindi written in?
When did the constructor of the fort, which is in progress to be a UNESCO World Heritage Site, rule the fort?
Has Eevee generally received negative receptions?
Which are the speakers of Engilsh called?
Which is the largest airport in Maharashtra? 
Does Karnataka's GSDP increase for the year 2014-2015?
Who inspires Jigglypuff to be a great singer in the Pokemon anime series?
Who is the creator of Magikarp?
Does Snorlax appear in every installment of Super Smash Bros.?
Is every French verb masculine or feminine?
Which level did the Defense Language Institute classify Ruassian into
Is Kodagu the largest district in Karnataka?
Is Aquarius one of the oldest of the recognized constellations along the zodiac?
When was the fall of the Shang Dynasty?
What script did Hindi use?
Was Gijarat known by the ancient Greeks?
Which gate is connected by the road to the north of Mingde Gate?
Was the discovery of the TRAPPIST-1 system seen as a small step toward finding life beyond Earth by astronomers?
What type of flower does the one on Venusaur's back resemble?
Do Francophones make up the majority of the population in Wallis and Futana?
Who gave Quanzhou's Jin River its name?
What was the Jin dynasty preceded by?
Which dynasty came after the Shang dynasty?
In which Indian states does Urdu have the status of "additional official language"?
What percent of the population in Gujarat natively speaks Gujarati?
Does Leo contain Messier 65?
In what period did Middle English develop?
What is the meaning of the first word part of the Persian original word of Punjab?
What language is the most widely spoken language in the European continent? 
Which language did Punjabi people speak?
What is Psyduck originally called in Japanese?
Who accurately described the water cycle of the evaporation of water into clouds? 
Are there Pokémon that are able to communicate with humans?
How many light years from Earth is the brightest star in Capricornus?
Not including the Lusophone diaspora, how many people live in the Lusophone area?
How did the Shang use chariots?
What minerals are found in Archaen rock formations?
Is agriculture in Meghalaya high productivity? 
Who created the three circles model?
How long did the Romance languages take to diverge?
Is English an official language of Pakistan?
What did Aeries represent before late Babylonian times?
What is the second-most urbanised major state in India?
What served as the mascot for both Pokêmon LeafGreen and the Japanese exclusive version of Red and Blue? 
What constellation is Antares in?
How many possible evolutionary forms does Eevee has?
Where is Russian mainly spoken?
Which Emperor moved the dynasty capital from Datong to Luoyang in 494?
Is the Liu Song dynasty the same as the Song dynasty?
Which language is the 10th-most widely spoken language in the world according to 2018 estimates by Ethnologue?
Who was emperor when Liang defeated Northern Qi?
Is Mewtwo featured as an unlockable player character in Super Smash Bros. Melee?
Did the types of clothing worn and the materials used during the Han period vary much?
Did the Indus Valley Civilization flourish from 9000 B.C?
Did the ruler of the Western Satraps (100 CE) found the Kardamaka dynasty?
What script did Urdu adopt?
Does the majority of the world's French-speaking population lives in Europe?
Duke Huan of Qi destroyed which Shang state?
What is German word order?
What is the official language of Taiwan?
What is the phonological system of Russian inherited from?
Under whose rule was the Chen dynasty conquered by the Sui?
What date was the 1919 solar eclipse?
What three languages are the most taught foreign languages throughout the world?
Which state is the sixth-largest state economy in India?
Do students in Trinidad have to learn Spanish?
How did Emperor Wen help the economy flourish?
Is Spanish the official language of Spain and the official language of the European Union?
In the founding myth, why Xie was granted a place called Shang as a fief?
What is evidence that Madrid Spanish is the most influential?
Was Emperor Wu died in 560?
Is French the official language of  Monaco?
What causes the wet and maritime tropical climate in Kerala?
Did Emperor Wu made Chen the governor of Gaoyao Commandery?
Who founded the Shang dynasty?
Who was the first in British India to begin a systematic study of Urdu?
What spiral galaxy located southeast of β Arietis is relatively bright and shows obvious nebulosity and ellipticity in an amateur telescope? 
Have Afghan refugees who stayed in Pakistan become fluent in Urdu?
Is Bombay Stock Exchange in Mumbai the oldest  stock exchange in Asia?
Where was the eventual capital of Western Jin?
Who was the father of Yu the Great?
Who suggested another visualization than Ptolemy?
Is it prohited to sell alcohol in Gujarat?
Is Charmander in Pokémon Sword and Shield?
What is Arabic's classification as a language?
Who featured in the film Pokémon: The First Movie as the main antagonist?
Where was the bishop of Braga in Portugal in 1047 from?
What ethnolinguistic group is the majority in Pakistan?
How many speakers of English was estimated by 2005?
What is the meaning of the second word part of the Persian original word of Punjab?
Does Russian have the highest number of Russian speakers?
Where is Nigerian English spoken?
How many princes did Wen massacre?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the sky?
How many major gouprs of dialects have been recognized traditionally?
What are the most powerful and rare of Pokémon referred to as?
How many vowels are in the Indonesian language? 
Does Indonesian always end clauses with verbs?
Which Pokemon game is Igglybuff introduced in?
How many exoplanet systems have been found in Aquarius as of 2013?
In which year did the British East India Company form their first base in India?
What origins did the Li family have? 
How many different Pokémon can Eeve evolve into?
Why did families throughout Han China made ritual sacrifices of animals and food to deities?
What is the goal of the Argonauts?
What was adopted as China's official language in the early 1900s?
Is Gujarat known for its manufacturing?
What is the name of the kinds of food that soak wheat in water such as modern wonton in the Tang dynasty?
How long does the journey from Guwahati to Shillong take?
Is it true that Venusaur appears in every main Pokémon title since its first appearance?
How did Han scholars such as Jia Yi potray the previous dynasty?
What made up seven tenths of  civilians' food udring the Ming dynasty?
Why was Jigglypuff chosen to appear in the Super Smash Bros series?
Is Mewtwo's appearance different from Mew's?
How does Ash stop the fighting caused by the main antagonist of Pokémon: The First Movie?
How does Punjab contribute to India and Pakistan's economy?
Is there an abundance of wood as a natural resource in Uttar Pradesh?
Has the Chinese capital been within the Mandarin-speaking area for most of the last century?
Which dialect of English became the standark written variety in the 9th century?
Who killed the monster Humbaba?
Which twins are associated with Gemini?
The classic account of the Shang comes from what texts?
Who founded the Vijayanagara Empire?
Is it true that the movement for a separate hill state began before 1960? 
Is Mewtwo a good Pokemon?
Based on the 2001 census, what is the second most spoken language in Gujarat?
Did Magikarp receive criticism for being useless or pointless?
Did Steven Bogos of The Escapist list Mewtwo as their favorite Pokémon? 
Who was Emperor Ashoka the Great's grandfather?
Who voices Psyduck in the Japanese animations?
What was China’s first imperial dynasty? 
Did the dealth penalty exist in reign of Emperor Taizong?
In the Arp peculiar galaxy catalog, which two galaxies are together classified as Arp 78?
Is Spanish in the top three spoken languages by number of native speakers?
Did the Liang princes get along well?
Whose grandson ordered his edicts engraved in the rock at Junagadh?
Is Mandarin a standardized language with few differences in dialects?
By what year did Emperor Xuanzong discard the policy of conscripting soldiers that were replaced every three years?
When were the boundary stones that mark the Aries constellation likely created?
Is Snorlax the heaviest known Pokémon?
Is Punjabi still used today?
Is German an official language in Luxembourg?
How many different designs are conceived by Game Freak's character development team?
What Eeveelution is the same type as Pikachu?
What city is the capital of the Chen dynasty?
What separates Mount Abu from the main Aravalli ranges?
Who identified 48 constellations in the second century?
Who was Princess Pingyang's father?
Which pokemon was the strongest, in terms of stats, in the original pokemon games?
Who were China's two most  famous poets?
In which level can Magikarp can learn Tackle move?
What constellation was considered to be the claws of Scorpius?
Does Kerala have the highest positive population growth rate in India?
What year did Liu Shao assasinate his father?
Who created Charmander?
Where did Jigglypuff first appear
Did British policies in colonial India promote Urdu?
Is the second dimmest one of the zodiacal constellations have an area of 506 square degrees?
What country is Indonesian the official language of?
How many official lanauges does Singapore have?
In what period was Spanish called "romanz castellano?"
Is Delta Cancri commonly known as southern donkey?
Who designed Bulbasaur?
When did pikachu first appear?
Why is Eevee called Evolution Pokémon?
In which media Eevee could transform back and forth from the three evolutions Vaporeon, Jolteon, and Flareon?
What happened to Abby during the Twitch Plays Pokemon stream?
What did The Great Vowel Shift affect
Can Mew and Mewto both learn every teachable move within the games?
Is there a space probe travelling on a trajectoy in front of Sagittarius?
Is the Daytime Arietids a meteor shower?
What is the name of a highly concentrated and compact Shapley class II cluster in scorpius constellation?
Does Eevee have blue eyes?
Who voiced Squirtle after Eric Stuart?
Is Maharasthra the fourteenth-highest ranking among Indian states in the human development index?
What is West Bengal's gross state domestic product (GSDP)?
Was Squirtle among one hundred Pokémon chosen as Japan's mascots in the 2015 FIFA World Cup?
Who was emperor when the Yellow River flooded?
What are the three official languages of the three subdivisions of Darjeeling district?
Is Maharashtra the the fourth-most populous state in India
Where was Huhanye Chanyu's rival claimant to the throne killed?
What is the dominant religion in Kerala?
What is Gujarat's population rounded to the closest million in 2011?
In which state is the Taj Mahal located?
Is Meghalaya predominantly an agrarian economy because of high productivity?
What language is the second most spoken language by number of native speakers?
Who inspires Jigglypuff to pursue singing?
Did Forbes rank Pikachu as the most top-earning fictional character of 2003? 
What is the official language of the sixth-largest Indian state by area?
What is the Latin for Taurus
Was the Sui dynasty long?
Whose kingdom spanned between rivers Hydaspes and Acesines?
Which cities in Punjab have a city-proper population of over a million?
In 2012, about how many people spoke German as their mother tongue?
Is Indore the largest city in Madhya Pradesh?
How many emperors did the Sui dynasty have in total?
What do Shang rituals feature?
How many people voiced detective Pikachu in the 2019 film Pokémon Detective Pikachu?
Is "entering tone" a term in traditional Chinese phonology?
Where was Malay originally spoken in? 
Which dynasty does historians generally regard as a high point in Chinese civilization?
What kind of language is French?
How long did the Turkic Ghaznavids in the tenth century ruled after overthrew the Hindu Shahis?
Does Psyduck appear in Pokémon Soul Silver?
Does Kerala have a dry and maritime tropical climate?
Which Indian state includes the Kudalasangama?
Is Cancer one of the twelve constellations of the zodiac?
What languages are Ottawa federal government workers required to know?
Is Ancient North Arabian a dialect of Arabic?
Is Chandrakanta written by Munshi Premchand?
What are some of the tributaries of the longest river in Madhya Pradesh?
How many people are able to speak French according to the OIF?
How does Andhra Pradesh compare to other states in India in terms of mica production?
What is the proper name of Beta Aquarii?
Which state has the highest number of nationally protected monuments in India?
What implies that the Shang used chariots in royal hunts and in battle only as mobile command vehicles?
Which Indian state was originally called State of Mysore?
Is Mandarin a group of Sinitic languages?
Is Tang dynasty between the Sui dynasty and the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period?
Is Rajasthan's economy primarily agricultural and pastoral?
Did Ranthambore National Park become a part of Project Tiger in 1678?
Is Snorlax popular in the Kanto region?
What is the tallest tower in Gujarat?
Is Charmander a Grass type Pokemon?
What empire existed in the Punjab between 1799 and 1849?
Spanish is part of what group of languages?
What does Rajasthan literally mean?
According to Shan Hai Jing, who was the great-grandfather of the founder of the Xia dynasty?
Does Red's team contain a Snorlax in the Pokémon Adventures manga?
How many stars are in Praesepe?
Is Spanish the third most spoken language in the world?
How long did the government following the INC stay in power?
What type of evolution does Eevee have?
Is English the most spoken native language in the world?
How many braids did all men in the Northern Wei dynasty have to roll and place on top of their head?
How many kingdoms were in Korea during the Sui dynasty?
What was the Xia succeeded by?
Is Germany the most widely spoken language in Europe?
Was there any farming land not owned by nobles in Zhou dynasty?
Has Squirtle received positive reception since it appeared in the Pokemon series?
Is Gujarat on the west coast of India?
Has Urdu been referred to as Hindi throughout History?
Coud artisan's son join government bureaucracies by taking exam?
What constellation is west of the constellation that means ram in Latin?
What is the brightest star in the constellation Libra?
What is the main river in West Bengal which divides into two branches?
Why is the road th eonly means of transport in  Meghalaya?
Does Russian have a similar present perfect tense as Portuguese? 
As of 2005, how many estimated speakers of English?
What rank does the Escapist have for Jigglypuff?
Why did Kubo Masakazu avoid the term clone for Mewtwo?
What is the last Shang capital?
What made Bengali the official language of Bangladesh?
Is there any clue of medieval trade in the western Indian Ocean?
What is the Indonesian word for "boyfriend"?
How long does the Sun appear in Sagittarius?
Which moves does Jigglypuff know in Super Smash Bros.?
What do adjectives modify?
What color is Charizard's back?
What year was Xiao Xian's realm destroyed?
Is Spanish spoken in multiple geographical parts of Africa?
Was the population of Meghalaya as of 2011 estimated at 8,300,000?
Where did Psyduck made its debut appearance in the Pokémon series?
Where is the Bombay Stock Exchange?
What is the largest tribal group in Meghalaya?
Who is Eevee?
As of 2016, were there 1.1 billion people spoke English as their first language?
Is Maharasthra divided into 10 divisions?
When was Maharashtra formed?
What constellation lies between Libra to the west and Saggittarius to the east? 
What state was created from Andhra Pradesh in 2014?
What three deep-sky objects are most common in Aquarius?
What is the brightest star in Cancer?
What half of the Punjab province became part of India at the time of partition in 1947? 
Why were hundreds of commoners buried alive with the royal corpse?
What official languages are used in more states then Arabic?
How did Castor and Pollux end up in heaven?
What form does Charizard have in Pokemon Sword and Shield?
Which group does Hindi belong to?
Is Squirtles' skin dark blue? 
Is Tamil Nadu the largest state in India?
Did the Tang dynasty cooperate with the Western Turks?
Could the Mandate of Heaven be used to remove the Zhou rulers from power?
Where did South African Nataler Duetsch speakers come from?
What is the brightest star in the Cancer constellation?
Is Urdu the largest language of Andgra Pradesh?
What is the rank of Gujarat among Indian states and union territories in human development index?
What has mostly replaced 8-bit encodings in communication protocols?
Which major city in Maharashtra has two separate districts?
Is Magikarp a strong swimmer?
Who was succeeded by his son Li Zhi (as Emperor Gaozong) in 649 CE?
Do more people speak Urdu or Kannada in Karnataka?
What region has the most diverse group of accents in English?
What are the f-/h- doublets of the Spanish word for "smith"?
Who designed Squirtle?
Is Kannada an unofficial language of Karnataka?
Until when did formal writing and poetry and fiction was done in Literary Chinese?
Who created the man executed by Emperor Xiaowu of Northern Wei the Prince of Wei?
Where does the standard form of Chinese remain the local Cantonese?
Was Hindavi the native language in the Delhi region of India?
Is Alpha Sagittarii the brightest star in the Sagittarius constellation?
Are French nouns inflected for both number and gender?
What is title of episode 11 of Pokémon Indigo League?
Are there eight main airports at Rajasthan?
How many modern constellations are there?
Are there multiple versions of different languages for Pokémon?
Is Virgo the smallest zodiac constellation?
When might Madhya pradesh have been inhabited?
Were there many people in the colony who could speak Dutch in 1940?
Was Han China’s first imperial dynasty?
How many distinct syllables are in Mandarin?
Do Tatsam words belong to one of the five principal categories of Hindi words?
Does Pikachu have long and yellow fur?
What proportion of English words are adjectives?
Does Portuguese have roots from the latin language? 
Can Charizards breathe intense flames that can melt any material?
Is the constellation with the brightest star named Spica the largest constellation in the zodiac?
Did the South Garo Hills district come into existence on April 12, 1992?
What was the name of Wang Tang's most famous work?
What is the Trifid Nebula?
What are the names of the "Three Giants of Yuanjia"?
When did Northern Qi attacked Liang?
Was Taoism polarized in the Jin Dynasty?
Where is the largest variety of orchids found in Meghalaya?
What is the brightest star of a constellation whose name means crab in Latin?
What causes a cultural presence of Portuguese speakers around the world?
Did Sima Qian describe all events about Shang dynasty in detail?
What makes Bulbasaur similar to a bulldog?
The constellation Pisces is essentially invisible in or near any major city due to what?
Does Mewtwo communicate telepathically with the clone of Fuji's deceased daughter?
Is majority of the geographical area of West Bengal protected land?
Is Spanish the world's second most widely spoken Romance language?
Did the peasants in the western parts of the empire soon turned to banditry?
What kind of script is the Arabic alphabet?
Who founded the Shang dynasty?
What types of fishing rods are best for finding Magikarps?
In which months does Punjab get the most rainfall?
Are there more than 150 different designs conceived by Game Freak's character development team?
What is Ash Ketchum's first Pokemon in the anime?
How long is the term of the Governor or Maharashtra?
Is Psyduck's dopeyness charmingly based on the comments?
Was the Bull of Heaven depicted standing in front of Inanna's standard?
How many seasons does Uttar Pradesh experience?
How many English words are estimated to be borrowed from French?
Did one of the descendants of Genghis Khan rule the Mughal Empire fron Dehli?
Are the capital and largest city of Karnataka the same city?
In which video game did Eevee receive a unique Gigantamax form with access to the unique G-Max Move G-Max Cuddle?
What year was Kerala formed?
Is French an official language of Luxembourg?
What color does NGC 7009 appear in a telescope?
Is football a popular sport in most states of India?
Did the Battle of Fei River happen before 386?
Is Libra the biggest of the 88 constellations in size?
Were the Han dynasty and the Xiongnu friendly?
In which period did Tang extended control from north Vietnam to a point north of Kashmir?
During which period did Spanish colonialism spur on the introduction of the language to overseas locations?
Is the Western astrological sign Scorpio the same as the astronomical constellation?
Why are the stars at the tip of Scorpius' tail called "the Cat's Eyes?"
What alphabet is Russian written in?
Which dynasties started carrying out admistration in Mandarin?
Is Capricornus' alpha star its brightest star?
Did the Qin dynasty use the Five Departments and Six Board system?
In which region is Yorkshire dialect spoken?
Which dynasty preceded the Tang dynasty?
What is Venusaur also know as?
What was the name that Nintendo decide to use in substitution of “Lizardon” for American children?
When did Arabic first emerge?
Did the Song dynasty exist when Emperor Wu of Liu Song conquered Qin?
Is Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Farahidithe first Arabic Dictionry Compiler?
Were the Chen imperial family's members still imporant after the dynasty's downfall?
What fraction of the Legislative Council does  not retire every two years?
Approximately what percent of the top 500 companies in the IT sector are based in Maharashtra?
Had Gujarati merchents in the 16th century earned an international reputation for commerical acumen?
Is Qin Shi Huang  the second emperor of the Qin dynasty?
Was the Emperor Wu of Liu Song a Jin dynasty general?
When was Urdu chosen as an official language of Pakistan?
What is Jigglypuff known in Japan?
What is the language spoken by 80.16% people in Uttar Pradesh?
Are mangos considered higher value crops in Meghalaya? 
What encouraged the visit of merchants from areas like Cairo in the early 16th century?
What region is Charmander native to?
Who was nicknamed the "Cultured Emperor"?
Is French the most spoken language in the United States?
Who was the chairman of the Writing and Grammar Committee for the Arabic Language Academy of Cairo in 1944?
Is the difference between Old High German and Old Saxon their respective vowel pronounciations?
How did the Tang family conceal its Xianbei heritage?
Did Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Arietis form a part of the porpoise?
In Pokémon Sword and Shield, what form of Snorlax can learn the G-Max Replenish move?
Where did the Hu Xia emperor Helian Chang flee westward?
Does NGC 6445 or NGC 6638 have a higher magnitude?
Are there states in America where German is the most commonly spoken language at home after English?
Who produced the Pikachu series?
What are the two chambers of Maharashtra's state parliament?
In its Gigantamax form, does Charizard's damage increase when the sun is up?
After the fall of the Northern Song, which form of speech developed based on the dialects of the North China Plain?
Is Spanish in general more common than Mandarin?
In what animated film did Rina Hoshino and Kotaro Watanabe appear?
Was Venusaur voted as one of the 20 best Pokémon in IGN's poll?
What is the official language of Karnataka? 
Was Pikachu one of Japan's mascots in the 2014 FIFA World Cup?
Was the Shang dynasty founded immediately following Xie?
Is the only wild population of the Asiatic lion in the world in Gujarat the Lion Forest National Park ?
Which is the brightest visible region in the Milky Way that has several embedded structures and superimposed dark nebulae?
What state is the wettest region of India? 
When did Eastern Han begin?
What are the two nearest open clusters to Earth that Taurus hosts?
In the anime, which character owned a Psyduck?
How many years was Adi Shankaracharya's lifespan?
Who was the mother of Chen Shubao?
In which battle were the Xin armies defeated?
What is the most commonly taught Chinese variety?
What did Shang religious rituals feature?
Are residents of Karnataka likely to speak Sanskrit primarily?
Is Gandhunagar the capital and largest city of Gujarat?
During which period did Old Hindi become enriched with words from Persian to become Hindustani?
What are speakers of English called?
Why did the throne pass to Emperor Wen of Chen?
What is the first most spoken language in the world?
Was Northern Wei the first building its own Great Wall since Han dynasty?
Who was Squirtle designed by?
Is Eevee the game mascot for Pokemon Red?
Did the Muses request that Crotus be placed in the sky?
Who founded the Mughal Empire?
Is Spanish the most spoken language in the United States?
What is the apparent magnitude of Sadalsuud?
Is Maharashtra the the fifth-most populous state in India
Where is Squirtle referred to as Zenigame?
Which emperor defeated the Xiongnu?
Where is the first technology park in India located?
Who was Bulbasaur designed by? 
Who instigated the Incident at Gaoping Tombs?
What is the final evolution form of Charmander?
What event marks the beginning of the history of the German language?
Which industry is suffering and being remedied by promoting West Bengal as an investment destination? 
In which year did Indonesia declare its indepedndence?
What video games did Pikachu first appear in, outside of Japan?
Who voiced Jigglypuff in english?
Do all bulbasaur in the Japanese version of the anime have the same voice actor?
What Pokemon type is Charmander?
Is it true that the Pleiades cluster is estimated to dissipate in another 250 million years?
Do native Bengali words allow initial consonant clusters?
What is the leading occupation in Uttar Pradesh?
Was Wang able to maintain the support of the common people during his regime? 
Who divided Scorpius into "skate stars" and "shark stars?"
What was the most prominent kingdom based in Kerala?
Which dynasty is traditionally considered the greatest age for Chinese poetry?
As of 2002, does the Sun appear in the constellation Libra on November 14?
Who wrote the Old Book of Tang?
What is one lasting legacy of Sui dynasty?
Were Satoshi Tajiri and Ken Sugimori friends?
Who founded Wei?
What is the average velocity of Delta Aquarid meteor in kilometres per second?
In what year did Emperor Wu die?
What does it mean when Aries is depicted as lying down?
In Braj Kachru's three circle model, is Jamacia in the inner circle?
In the animated series, what did the Squirtle Squad need that caused the Squirtle with Ash's team to leave?
In what year did Chen Baxian fall and the throne was passed to his nephew Chen Geng?
What can Charizard's flames melt?
Why was the Justice Party successful colonial India
When were Pokemon Red and Blue released?
Was the development of English isolated?
Is facilitating domestic trade the initial reason of building Grand Canal?
What religion did Ubaidullah practice when he traveled to the Lakshadweep islands in 661 CE?
Who is credited as the main person behind Pikachu's design?
Is West Bengal's total area is greater than 80,000 square kilometers?
Who did emperor Chen Xu marry?
Is it common for Magikarp knowing moves other than Splash, Tackle, and Flail, to be awarded to players?
What is another language that is considered to be one of the two official languages of Pakistan except Urdu?
What strengthened dialectical differences and prevented the establishment of any standardized national language?
Is Cancer the dimmest of the zodiacal constellations?
Did Chen have Emperor Jing yield the throne to him in the summer?
What is the fastest growing language in Africa?
How many state government dispensaries does the state have?
Which constellation contains HIP 14810?
Is Sima Fei's wife a daughter of Emperor Jinlong?
What is the official language of Kerala?
As of 2011, what percentage of West Bengal's religious population are not Hindus?
Are fruits grown in the Punjabi region?
What dynasty was the most long-lived and most powerful of the northern dynasties prior to the reunification of China?
What did Hangzhou used to be named in the Sui dynasty?
In which year did Luoyang become the capital of the Sui dynasty?
Does English belong only to people who are ethnically English?
Did the Shang and Zhou dynasty have different terms for their rulers?
What is the predominant ethno-linguistic group in Maharashtra?
What is the range of the end date of the Shang Dynasty as found by radiocarbon dating?
Can most Galicians and Northern Portuguese understand each other? 
How often does the star Lambda (λ) Tauri decrease in brightness?
Is Hindi a protected language in South Africa?
What, like HIP 14810, is a G-type main sequence star?
What are long-lived Magikarp able to use their immense splashing power for?
What year did Urdu become the official language in Pakistan
Was Ptolemy's method of connecting the stars of Capricornus important?
When did the Shang rule?
Where does Rajasthan rank among Indian states in human development index?
Who conqured the Shang Dynasty?
What country is West Bengal in?
What is the official language of Andhra Pradesh?
Does Uttar Pradesh top the list of states of encounter killings and custodial deaths?
Is Kerala the 13th-largest Indian state by population?
What did Yuan Yue do when he realized that he could not defeat the Erzhus?
Is the Yin dynasty the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
Of how many countries is Portuguese an official language of?
Cui Hao was a significant member relevant to the Northern Wei emperors' desire for what?
Who designed Bulbasaur?
Does Jigglypuff want to put people to sleep with its songs?
What time of year does the scorpion come for Orion?
Where were Shang Dynasty's writings best preserved?
What is the national language of Bangladesh
What was the capital of the Chen dynasty?
What animal does Nishida based Pikachu's original design on?
Which state straddles the Narmada River, means "Central Province" and is located in the geographic heart of India?
What moves can Magikarp learn by level in the first generation of games?
During the early 1700s, what was Urdu referred to as by European writers?
Can adjective be placed before the words they modify in Indonesian? 
What is located in the center of the Cancer constellation?
Which Pokémon species is called Koikingu in Japan?
How many stars does the Praesepe cluster have?
What has IGN criticized Magikarp for?
From which Celtic tribe's name is the luso- prefix derived from?
Who was Snorlax created by?
Does Snorlax have larger feet than most other Pokémon?
Does West Bengal have more than 91 million inhabitants?
Did the Jin Dynasty developed an alliance with the Tuoba against the Xiongnu state Han Zhao?
What is the sole working language at the Court of Justice of the European Union?
How many decimal places was pi calculated to during the Liu Song dynasty?
Which star represents the left shoulder
Which artifact did Shu Yi use to memorialize his ancestors?
Is Mewto in all Super Smash Bros games?
Where was the initial capital of Western Jin?
What was a lasting legacy of the Sui dynasty?
Who was injured during the battle of Charizard and Dragonite?
What does Aquarius mean in Latin?
Is English the second-most spoken native language in the world?
Which literary tradition was founded by Amir Khusrau? 
What is the reason that causes northern China to have relative linguitsic homogeneity?
Is NGC 4438 a small planet?
Is Karnataka a state in the northwestern region of India?
Can a fire-flying-dragon type Pokemon the own dragon type move skill set?
Where are the ruins of the Indus Valley Civilization at Kalibangan and Balathal located?
What are the notable characteristics of Magikarp?
Was Punjab divided into two parts in 1940?
Who succeeded Liu Jun as emperor of the Liu Song dynasty?
What is the fourth most spoken language in the United States?
What is the third-largest state by area bordered by the Arabian Sea to the west?
Who is the actor that voiced James in the original Japanese version of the Pokémon anime and voiced Charizard in both the Japanese and English-language versions of the anime?
Is English the largest language by number of speakers?
What is the written form of Standard Chinese in Taiwan?
What constellations are to the East of Sagittarius?
Is it thought that Shennong Ben Cao Jing medical text was compiled by two people’s collaboration?
Is Snorlax the heaviest Pokeman?
What were the inhabitants of the Indo-Gangetic Plain originally referred as?
Is Cancer the dimmest of the zodiacal constellations?
Was Empress Hu killed by Erzhurong's order?
What was made the official language of China by the Qing Dynasty?
Is Algieba more than 1260 light-years away from Earth?
Did the name Yin dynasty used widely throughout the dynasty?
In which Chinese Dynasty the three-legged iron seed drill was invented in?
After the attempts of Gun to stop the flooding of the Yellow River had failed, who did the throne pass to?
What linguistic region was awarded the most Nobel Prizes in literature?
What Indian states border Maharashtra on the south?
What is the official and national language of Bangladesh?
What was responsible for the rebirth of culture in China under the Sui dynasty?
Is the White Horse temple China's first known buddhist temple?
Is the Ranthambore National Park located in "the land of kings"?
Who caused the decline in influence of Buddhism?
Is Mewtwo taller than 7 feet?
What made conscripting soldiers every three years expensive for the early Tang dynasty?
Do different dialects of English share the same phonetics and phonology?
Did the literacy rate of Rajasthan double from 1991 to 2001?
Under who did the Liu Song economy prosper during the rule of Yuanjia?
What is the major economic feature of Punjab around 3000 BCE?
What is the name of the trainer who has a Psyduck and usually releases it by accident in the anime?
Can Psyduck swim?
Are more than 85,000 English words nouns?
Did the Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty rule in the 6th century CE?
How much time has elapsed between the First Battle of Tarain and the Second Battle of Tarain?
What reception has Venusaur received?
In Pokémon Adventures, which evolution does Eevee ultimately take on?
Is Khasi the official language of the state?
Where is the Tang Capital?
Does Bulbasaur like to take a nap in the sunshine?
Who was the successor to the emperor Ming?
Which constellation is to the south of Libra?
Which chinese dynasty ruled between Xia dynasty and Western Zhou dynasty?
Who ordered Yu the Great's father to be imprisoned for life?
Who became the ruler of Uttar Pradesh after Sher Shah's son died?
When was the Shang settlement featuring most prominently sacrificial pits excavated?
What is the official language of Spain?
Is Portuguese one of the West Iberian Romance languages?
What did eevee evolve into in the file  Detective Pikachu?
Who was the second wife of Emperor Ku?
Who established the Han dynasty?
Who implemented the reforms that introduced the "equal-field landholding system"?
Does the Punjab region of India and Pakistan have a historical and cultural link to Americans?
When did English achieve Parity with French as a diplomatic language?
What are the two official languages of Pakistan?
Which state did King Solomon receive peacocks from?
The basis of Standard High German developed with which book?
Does English have five primary tenses?
When was M74 discovered?
In Braj Kachru's three circle model, is Egypt in the inner circle?
Did Charmander’s personality change drastically?
How much food grain was produced in Uttar Pradesh in 2014-15?
What was Eevee originally going to be named?
Could generals of Emperor Wen make independent decisions?
Is Pikachu a Nintendo mascot?
When was the Galician-Portuguese period?
Who assasinated Emperor Yang?
Is the rural female sex ratio higher than the urban female sex ratio in Meghalaya?
What does Squirtle wear in the Pokemon anime?
Did Tanguturi Prakasam Pantulu become the Chief Minister after the unification with Telangana?
Are the Garos the largest group of tribal people making up the majority of Meghalaya's population?
How many native speakers speak the second most widely spoken scheduled language in India?
Do the northwestern districts of Madhya Pradesh have the heaviest rainfall?
Did Empress Wu enter the court with a high ranking position?
Where is the highest peak in West Bengal?
Do students use Indonesian in school?
Did the Spring and Autumn period span 241 years? 
Which constellation contains HD 20367?
Who led the Dutch fleet that first present in Kerala?
What was found in the Bundi and Bhilwara districts of Rajasthan?
How many inhabitants, rounded to the closest million, in India's eighth-largest state by population in 2011?
Was Charizard designed based on Charmander?
Who killed Emperor Yang?
Is Saggitarius located between Microscopium and Capricornus?
Are there multiple types of Leonid showers?
Does various Chinese classics include Shiji?
Puppeteers in London were hired to create 3D puppets of what?
What kind of students were candidates for imperial examinations in Tang dynasty?
Was Goguryeo one of the Three Kindoms of Korea?
Could More than half of the speakers understand the Standard Mandarin in early 1950s?
Why is Magikarp called Koiking?
Does jigglypuff only appear in a couple of games?
Who wrote a Bengali poem that inspired the national anthem of Sri Lanka?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the zodiac?
Can architecture from the Pallava dynasty still be visited today?
What is the Latin word for weighing scales?
Where was Eevee's first anime appearance?
Who had greater ambitions in contrast to other Wang family members?
What period of English came after Middle English?
According to Richard M. Eaton, who is the father of Khizr Khan?
When did French replace Latin as the most important language for diplomacy?
Does Eevee have small ears?
What are the top two most spoken native languages in the world?
Is the bulb on Bulbasaur's back for collecting water?
Is the Geminids the only meteor shower in Gemini?
Did Psyduck appear in Pokémon Pink?
Who was the last Shang king?
Can Cancer be seen by the naked eye?
Is Wang Yu's birthplace known as Chengcheng in modern days?
Are there any stars from Aries recognized in traditional Chines astronomy?
What two months do Leonid showers occur?
Russian is written using what alphabet?
Was there any Tuoba Xianbei princesses of the Northern Wei married to southern Han Chinese men from the imperial families?
Who is the namesake of the Liu Song dynasty?
Did the Mughals take control of the Punjab region from the Mughals?
In 2018	 what percent of the nation of Vanuatu was estimated to speak French? 
What is the state capital of West Bengal?
Is Meghalaya the driest state of India?
Cancer is one of how many constellations in the zodiac?
Is português continental based on the Portuguese spoken in the area including and surrounding the cities of Coimbra and Lisbon?
What constellation was once considered Scorpion's claws?
Which actor voices Charizard?
Does Leo contain the galaxy Messier 98?
When did the Dai state fall to Former Qin?
Which Pokemon has stayed with Ash longer than Bulbasaur?
Does the Other Backward Class population constitute more than half of the population of Maharashtra?
What is the period of the U Scorpii nova?
What constellation is to the east of Scorpius?
Which equinox is currently located in Pisces?
How did Hou Jing die?
When did Indonesia declare independence? 
Is Eevee popular with Pokemon fans?
Whose death caused the War of the Eight Princes?
Is "youse" a first person pronoun?
When did Li Yuan rise in rebellion?
What is the official language of Maharashtra?
Was Jin dynasty succeeded by the Three Kingdoms period?
Who designed Mewtwo for the first generation of Pocket Monsters games?
What color is Magikarp?
What does swelling up in size do to help Green?
When does summer begin in Maharashtra?
How was the Quran written?
In the anime, did Magikarp only appeared once?
What did the Babylonians identify Sagittarius as?
Who defeated the Zamorin of Kozhikode in 1443?
Alternatively, what was the Liang dynasty known as?
Who was responsible for the death of Emperor Shun?
What are the top two most-spoken languages in the world?
Is Portuguese official language of Mozambique?
Do most Indonesians only speak the national language?
Does England set the standard for use of English?
Is Mewtwo taller than 6 foot?
Did Motofumi Fujiwara design vaporeon?
When was Abu al-Aswad al-Du'ali born?
According to Tracey West and Katherine Noll, how many Pokémon are better than Mewto overall?
What evolves into Jigglypuff?
Which pokemon did Kevin Slackie say was the first one most of the one they fell with?
Did the Sui dynasty conquer the rump state of Western Liang in 487? 
What was Eevee originally going to be named?
How many Mahajan padas existed in ancient India?
Did Emperors Yang send military expeditions into Vietnam?
Is Taurus in the Northern Hemisphere's winter sky?
What did Serena's Eevee evolve into?
Who created Venusaur?
What is the name of Liu Jun's son?
Which dynasty expanded on the Tang dynasty's imperial examination system?
Why did Nintendo decide to give the various Pokémon species "clever and descriptive names" related to their appearance or features when translating the game for western audiences?
What is the ranking of the official language in Bangalore and the Kolar district if compared to the state?
Did the peasentary benefit from Wang Mang's government reform? 
Who wrote the Explanation of the Mean?
Is the White Revolution of India the world's biggest dairy development program?
Was Gun ordered to be imprisoned for life by Shun at a mountain?
What word did Japanese sources avoid when talking about Mewtwo due to its negative connotation?
Where did Portuguese originate?
According to Greek mythology, which god hunts every winter?
Does M35 (NGC 2168) have different size than the full moon?
What is 7 meteors per hour the normal peak rate of the Leonidis in November?
In which year Tang dynasty was formally restored by Emperor Zhongzong?
When is the sun in Taurus?
Who appears as a final boss in Pokémon Stadium and Pokémon Pinball?
Which GamesRadar editor noted that while “ugly”	 Venusaur is also “intimidating”?
Is Kerala home to 2.8% of India's population? 
Is West Bengal the most visited tourist destination in India?
The types of clothing worn and the materials used during the Han period depended upon what?
When did the Romans bring Vulgar Latin to the Iberian Peninsula?
What is the wettest place on Earth?
Did the Kshatrapa dynasty come before the Gupta Empire?
Who was the father of Princess Pingyang?
Is West Bengal the largest state by area in India?
Who is one of Ash's most faithful Pokémon?
Which part of Portugal is Coimbra and Lisbon located in? 
How many short vowel phonemes does Arabic have?
What does "Lugalirra" mean in English?
Is Libra to the west of Scorpio?
Is the planet Jupiter larger than all planets that orbit stars in the Virgo constellation?
Why did English continue as the official language?
When did French become mandatory for legal documents?
Were the southern parts of Madhya Pradesh never invaded by the south Indian Western Chalukya Empire?
In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Taurus from which day?
What was Tamil Nadu's colonial name?
Who developed Pokemon?
When was the Chen dynasty conquered by the Sui dynasty?
Who founded Tang dynasty?
Did Castor and Pollux have the same father?
What district came into existence on 18 June 1992 after the division of the West Garo Hills district?
What constellation is between Aquarius to the southwest and Aries to the east?
Is Rajasthan a state in northern India?
How bright in magnitude is the star Gamma Piscium?
According to Confucian family norms, were family members treated equally?
The Furrow was part of which constellation?
Is Scorpius bright?
Is there a hot season and monsoon season in the Punjab region?
Does Psyduck evolve into Pikachu?
What language shares a core vocabulary and grammar with Urdu?
Which mega form brought Charizard more success in the competitive scene?
Are mandals bigger than districts?
Which constellation's name is Latin for maiden?
In English, What is Standard Chinese referred to besides "Mandarin"?
Where does most of Spanish's vocabulary come from?
Who killed Huhanye's rival claimant to the throne?
What is Snorlax known as in Japan?
Does the name of the constellation with the brightest star called Zubeneschamali mean weighing scales in Latin?
The Gliese 581 planetary system has how many confirmed planets?
Does Sagittarius contain  many star clusters and nebulae?
What is the third most widely spoken language in the EU?
Which family was known as the Longxi Li lineage?
How large is the Desert National Park in Jaisalmer?
Did the Northern Wei made a surprise attack on the new Hu Xia capital Pingliang and conquered the state in fall 430?
Pikachu's thunderbolt tail is supposed to represent what typing?
Is the Pokemon franchise older than 20?
In what year did Bihar accept Hindi as its sole official language?
Is Charizard always playable as a standalone character?
When did spoke-wheeled chariots appear in China?
In what way is Pikachu's body electric?
Who often referred the Bengal Sultanate as the richest country?
What is the franchise's monster index called?
What is the color of the long barbels on male Magikarp?
Is everyone in Uttar Pradesh vegetarian?
In which games is Charmander a starting pokemon?
Which massacre in Punjab bolstered the Indian independence movement?
What is the total area of West Bengal in square kilometers?
What language is Urdu mutually intelligible with?
In which year did Generation VIII and Pokemon Sword and Shield release?
When was China's first known nationwide census?
What language is taught in areas the United States near Quebec?
When did the Romans arrive in the Iberian Peninsula?
Is the Taiwanese standard of Mandarin similar to that of mainland China?
Is Zygarde capable of human speech?
Did Zhang Dabao start a rebellion after being accused of corruption?
What is located about 1.8° west of Epsilon (ε) Tauri?
How far from the Earth is the Trifid Nebula located?
Between what years was the punjab insurgency?
Do both Gary Oak and Mikey have an Eevee?
Which constellations are on either side of the Pisces?
Which country was called East Bengal?
What does the character "Sui" mean literally?
When did Xiao take the throne?
How are female pikachus different? 
Who decided to give the various Pokémon species "clever and descriptive names" related to their appearance or features when translating the game for western audiences as a means to make the characters more relatable to American children?
What is the meaning of the name Rajasthan?
Does Gujarat have the best pharmaceutical industry in India?
When did the Xianbei-ruled Northern Zhou conquered the Northern Qi?
Is English a pluricentric language?
What Scorpius star was named because of its distinct reddish hue?
What is the Virgo prominent season?
How many million light-years away is NGC 520, a pair of colliding galaxies, located?
How many times bigger than the Sun is the largest star in Aquarius?
Why is the contribution of agricultural production to Meghalaya's GDP low?
Who came up with the name "eeveelutions"?
Which war ended the Sikh empire established by Maharaja Ranjit Singh?
Who ownd farming lands?
Who recognize that diabetic patients should avoid consuming alcohol and starchy foods?
Where was Eevee ranked in a list of the "Top 10 Cutest Video Game Characters"?
Were garlic and salt the common cooking ingredients during the Tang dynasty?
What portion of Rajasthan lies northwest of the Aravallis?
How analytic is modern English syntax language?
What constellation is between Libra and Sagittarius?
What globular cluster 33	000 light-years from Earth is a compact Shapley class II cluster? 
Did English capitalize all nouns into the 1700s? 
Are Alemannic dialects spoken in Stuttgart?
What does Igglybuff evolve into?
Was Squirtle designed as one of the starter pokemons of Pocket Monsters Red and Green?
When are the first documents showing evidence of the precursor to modern Spanish from?
Who is the Mughal empire in the period 1645-1656 during the Mughal era?
What have fans dubbed Eevee's multiple potential evolutions?
Is English being written in Roman alphabet?
Is it illegal to sell alcohol in Gujarat?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the zodiac?
Is German the most scientifically used language? 
In Namibia, about how many people still speak German today?
What is the most popular and widely celebrated festival in West Bengal ?
Where is Virgo located relative to the other constellations in the sky?
How many autonomous district councils are present in Meghalaya?
Did Zhou Wu sent three of his brothers and an army to ensure that Wu Geng would not rebel after the Shang were defeated?
What is the last month of the winter season in Maharashtra?
Is the Sun in Scorpio in February?
What is the largest constellation in the sky?
What is the Tang capital called today?
Whose death angers Mewtwo and makes it destroy the lab and escape?
What is different between male and female Pikachu?
Which dynasty is the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
Which kind of characters does North American audiences prefer?
Which is the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
How many countries is French an  official language in?
What is the most spoken native language within the European Union?
What constellation is M74 in?
What is Snorlax's unique Z-move?
In which video games did Venusaur first appear?
What movement was a students’ and middle-class people’s movement against economic crisis and corruption in public life? 
Which Indian state is described in the story of a merchant of King Gondophares and Apostle Thomas in 16th century manuscripts?
What kind of alphabet itself is an extension of the Arabic alphabet?
Does the symbol for Cancer represent a lobster?
Who voiced Pikachu in the 2019 film Pokémon Detective Pikachu?
Who used the Greek letters Alpha through Omega to label the most prominent stars in the constellatio?
What is the world's fourth-most spoken language?
Is Jigglypuff well known for singing a lullaby?
What is the world's most influential language?
Whose battle caught the attention of Zeus?
Does Karnataka have the highest number of nationally protected monuments in India?
How does formal Urdu differ from Hindi?
Why Urdu was promoted in colonial India by British policies?
Was the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup played in Kerala?
Were the Visigoths occupying Portugal in AD500?
How many oracle bones were found in the initial excavation of the Anyang site?
When did Aries shift from the identification as the Agrarian Worker to the Ram?
What is the period	 in days	 of the Mira Variable star R Arietis? 
What is the state government debt of West Bengal?
Early in Northern Wei history, when were emperor's mothers killed?
According to the traditional chronology, when did the Shang rule?
Is Charmander one of Ash's most used Pokémon?
What shape do the non-brightest stars make?
Did only Emperor of Yang sent military expeditions into Vietnam?
Why was Hitokage renamed to Charmander?
Is Portuguese the most spoken Romance language in the world?
Who emphasized loyalty to the emperor as a Taoist virtue?
When was the Charizard first release in video game?
In which game does Venusaur first have the G-Max Vine Lash attack?
What made many Chinese were relieved when the Qin dynasty fell?
Was the oldest reference to Rajasthan printed?
The Tang dynastic extended and consolidated the political system of which dynasty?
What is the language which contains loanwords from Telugu and Marathi?
On what video game console can you knock a Magikarp into a waterfall to see it evolve?
Which episode was Snorlax's first apperance in?
Which Bengali revolutionary groups helped with the armed attempts against the British Raj?
Is Hindi written from left to right?
How many official languages at the federal level does Switzerland have? 
Who decided to set up a public road transportation system in 1937?
Is the twelfth magnitude of the star in NGC 2158 is 9.2?
How many main forms of written Bengali are there?
What celestial hemisphere is Sagittarius located in? 
In the anime, Charmeleon evolved because of who?
What became synonymous with  everything sophisticated in society during the Tang dynasty?
In what year did the British East India Company choose to replace the court language of various Indo-Islamic empires with Urdu?
What famous attack does Bulbasaur have?
Who eliminated Xiao Ji?
What did the stars of Aries form before late Babylonian times?
Did the rise of the Pallava dynasty take place over one century? 
When did Qing Dynasty fall?
Who did Shah Arifin Rafiuddin preach Islam to?
What constellations is Aquarius between?
Who is Snorlax inspired by in appearance and behavior?
Pisces is associated with which Greek legend?
How large is Uttar Pradesh?
A disgruntled Shang prince named Jizi, who had refused to cede power to the Zhou, left China with a small army, founded a state known as Gija Joseon in northwest Korea, these legend lead to a lot of debate, right?
What's the result of genetic recombination of Mew's DNA that was born from Mew similar to real life clones. 
In the Pokémon Adventures manga	 what does the character Red nickname the Bulbasaur he receives from Professor Oak?
When was an important Shang settlement excavated near Xiaoshuangqiao?
Who appointed Mangubhai C. Patel?
What is Sinitic language is known as?
What alphabet is Russian written with?
What is the earliest form of English called?
What is the name of the photovoltaic solar park in Madhya Pradesh that was commisioned with 750 MW capacity?
Is Kerala's eastern coastal belt relatively flat compared to the western region?
Does Classical Arabic largely share much of the same grammatical standars as Modern Standard Arabic?
What is the tenth largest Indian state by area and the sixth largest by population?
Does everyone agree on the degree to which shamanism was a central aspect of Shang religion?
Who created a sequential account of the Shang dynasty?
Whose wrote the literary collection ‘New Songs of Yutai’? 
After his death, what was Sima Yan known as?
Who established the Han dynasty?
What colors does Snorlax have on his body?
What is the emperor after Wang Mang?
How Jigglypuff's pleasing melody puts its audience to sleep?
What was the language of commerce and government in the Habsburg Empire?
During which century did the classification of Chinese dialects evolved?
When the agrarian rebellions was happening for Northern Wei, did the Northern Wei general Yuan Faseng have control over Pengcheng?
How many tones does Mandarin have?
Is agriculture the smallest occupation in Uttar Pradesh?
Is Jie overthrown by Tang?
Were Buddhist monks included with the foreign travelers to Eastern-Han China?
Which Emperor of the Han dynasty encouraged nominees for office to receive education at the Imperial University in 136 BCE?
Is Ahmedabad Gujarat's capital city?
Which individual was defeated and overthrown by the forces of Alauddin Khalii from Delhi in 1297? 
In the Electric Tale of Pikachu manga Jigglypuff is owned by?
Did the Nationalist movement in Indonesia reject Indonesian language from the outset?
Is Beta Librae the brightest star in Libra?
What is the ancient Chinese name for the constellation Aries?
Where did Portuguese originate?
Who spread Latin language after the Romans arrived in the Iberian Peninsula?
How many states in India have a Christian majority?
Which religion was polarized in the Jin dynasty?
What is the most spoken native language in the European Union?
Is Kerala the most urbanised major state in the country?
Are there more than 30 consonants in the phonetic inventory of standard Bengali?
What are English nouns inflected for?
Which city did Sultan Ahmed Shah name as capital of Gujarat?
How many variants of Arabic arised in the Hejaz during late pre-Islamic times
Which languages have influenced English?
In what year was the AIADMK founded?
In which peninsula does most of Gujarat's coastline lie?
The Tawa is a tributary of which major river?
Before the Xia dynasty was established, what were frequent between Yellow Emperor's tribe and Chi You's tribe?
Does Snorlax sleep throughout the game in Pokemon Ranger?
Who were the country's first two presidents?
Was Psyduck extremely popular?
How did scholars asembled the implied king list and genealogy?
What was the posthumous name of the founder of the Jin dynasty?
Does Rajasthan cover 647,000 square kilometers?
Are the Khasis, Jaintias and the Garos three major ethnic tribal groups in Meghalaya?
Is Saggitarius located between Ophiuchus and Capricornus?
When was the land tax rate reduced from one-fifteenth of a farming household's crop yield to one-thirtieth? 
Is Eevee considered a popular Pokemon?
Is African-American Vernacular English a fully developed variety of english?
Was Munchlax obtainable in Pokemon XD: Gale of Darkness?
How many total speakers did Urdu have in 2018?
In the Rebellion of the Three Guards, did the Shang defeat the Zhou?
Does over a quarter of people in the Punjab region of Pakistan work in agriculture?
Did Psyduck appear before Pokemon Red and Blue?
How many states have Arabic as an official language?
Is the strongest meteor showers in Aries visible to the naked eye?
Is there any place on earth with a higher average annual rainfall than Meghalaya? 
Which year did Liu Jun die?
Who are the major internet service providers in Rajasthan?
Does Pikachu evolve into Raichu?
Who was the last emperor of Liang?
Are there more then ten badges in Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver?
Who was the first in British India to begin a systematic study on Urdu?
Around 1780	 which poet first used the name Urdu for Hindustani language? 
In Indonesion, does the phrase for "to run amok" come from Dutch? 
How many evolutions does Eevee have?
Who described Psyduck as fun to use "if only to see the reaction of other players?"
Was Han dynasty after Qin dynasty?
Is Tamil the official language of Karnataka?
What event marks the end of the Early New High German period?
Who is the chief of Langah in 1445?
How long did Xuanzang travel in the South Asian state?
How many main recipients of sacirfice were there?
In what year was M74 discovered by Pierre Méchain, a French astronomer?
Who voices Lizardon in both the English and Japanese language versions of the anime?
Which dynasty interrupted the Han dynasty?
Who is the creator of Koiking?
To whom did Liu Jun pass his throne?
When did Xiao Yi become Emperor Yuan of Liang?
Who is the main antagonist in the film Pokémon: The First Movie?
When was Lisān al-ʿArab written?
Does Rajasthan have four national tiger reserves?
What is the largest river in Gujarat? 
Is Magikarp able to beat Pikachu?
What did Nishida base Pikachu's original design on?
Do Psyduck live in the ocean?
What does Charmander's evolution evolve into?
What does Sagittarius translate to from Latin?
Was the Liang dynasty the first Southern dynasty?
Which company did Motofumi Fujiwara work for?
Was the cultural centre of Bengal in the 19th century and early 20th century a city founded by the British?
In what direction is the March equinox drifting due to precession?
What country took over the Phillipines after the Spanish-American War?
What is the official language of Kerala?
Is Jigglypuff skin pink in color?
When did Sikh Empire stopped ruling the Punjab?
What notable local Chinese school of Buddhism started to flourish during the late Six dynasties and Sui dynasty?
Is Javanese a kind of indigenous local language?
Does Bollywood have a bigger film production facility than Tollywood?
Which part of Karnataka are the Hindu temples found in?
What type of German words are perceived as more scholarly? 
When did Empress Wu yield her position?
What is Bulbapedia?
How many constellations border Cancer?
When does Charmander evolve into Charmeleon?
Does Charizard appear in the Pokemon Trading Game's initial release?
Does the Sun appear in Aries in October?
Where is Urdu a registered regional dialect?
Is Hindi the official language of the Government of India?
The Andhras left North India from what river?
Did Official Nintendo Magazine viewers vote Squirtle as the best water-type Pokemon?
In which year did India become independent?
What is the majority religion of Meghalaya?
Do Psyduck remember using their powers?
Does Kerala have the largest population of Christians in India?
What was the most common language in Indonesia in 1945?
Which Emperor of the Han dynasty established the Imperial University in 124 BCE?
How many official languages are there of the United Nations?
What is the official language of the Indian state of West Bengal?
What does the name "Madhya Pradesh" translate to?
Who sacked the Jin capital Luoyang?
Was Literary Chinese used in formal writing?
What is the modern capital of Madhya Pradesh?
Who defeated the army of Wu Geng's father?
What kind of stars are the two brightest in Aquarius?
The King James version of the Bible is an example of which characteristics of the Early Modern English?
In which year did Charizard make its vedeo game debut in with the Japanese release of Pokémon Red and Blue
Are Eevee rare?
Dose Charizard have an unfavorable reputation?
Were there more native speakers of Indonesian than native speakers of Javanese in Indonesia in 1945?
In 557, what dynasty did Chen Baxian establish?
Who poisoned Zhonzong?
In the first episode of the Pok√©mon anime series, is Pikachu the first Pok√©mon Ash Ketchum got?
When was Karnataka formed?
Does Uttar Pradesh have a very dry climate?
What is the earliest form of English called?
In the states of North Dakota and South Dakota	 Is German the most common language spoken at home after English? 
In 466, who waged an unsuccessful civil war against the Emperor Ming of Liu Song?
Are the Khasis, Jaintias and the Bhois three major ethnic tribal groups in Meghalaya?
Who listed Venusaur as 21st of the best Pokémon?
Who is the daughter of Icarius of Athens?
What type of hockey is played at the Kodava Hockey Festival?
What were the three major Indian  dynasties?
In which year did Western Wei capture Jiangling?
Who catches a Snorlax in the Pokémon Adventures manga?
Was Jigglypuff or Igglybuff introduced to Pokémon first?
Do Charizard have the same avtor in both Japanese and English versions of anime?
What was the highest recorded temperature in Raichuru district?
What nation's astronomy depicts the "Army of Yu-Lin"?
What is the recommended abbreviation for Taurus?
Can Cancer be seen with a latitude of -75?
What is the largest Indian state by area?
The Han dynasty was succeeded by what?
How often does Comet Tempel-Tuttle outburst?
Who did Huan Xuan's father lead military campaigns against?
Who fought the battle of the Hydaspes against Alexander the Great?
What color fur does pikachu have?
Was Orion a mortal?
Does the Western astrological sign Scorpio differ from the astronomical constellation?
What are the two most spoken languages in Karnataka?
Does Meghalaya have six other sister states in northeast India? 
French is one of how many official languages used in the United Nations?
What is the brightest star in Virgo?
Which official language of India also has official status in Jammu and Kashmir and Telangana?
What language is spoken by large numbers of migrant South Asian workers in the major urban centres of the Persian Gulf countries?
Was the city of Hulao standing under siege in fall 423?
Who did the Sui lose to in military campaigns four times?
What was the capital of the Han and Jin dynasties?
When did the Northern Wei dynasty officially end?
Who was the successor of Qasim?
Did Pankenier propose a later establishment date of the Shang dynasty compared to the Bamboo Annals?
Where did Ash take the Charmander he caught for training when he had trouble controlling it?
Does Uttar Pradesh have the least amount of religious people out of all the Indian states?
How many mega evolved forms does Charizard have?
Did the study of mitochondrial DNA from Yinxu graves show similarity with southern Han Chinese?
What is the brightest star in Libra?
Is Sagittarus A* visible to the naked eye?
Was the Shang dynasty connected to the Silk Road?
What is Snorlax's pre-evolution?
Which celestial hemisphere is Sagittarius in? 
Which Chinese dynasty's court is portrayed in The Gathering of Kings?
Does Indonesian have diphthongs in closed syllables? 
Who was trusted official in charge of Wu's private office?
Who founded Gija Joseon?
What was the first "Electric-type" Pokemon
What dim Aries star has magnitude 4.55 and is 343 light-years away? 
Does Arabic always show influence in Hindi via Persian?
Who debated on the issue of  the official language of India after partition in the Indian parliament?
Is the Ganges delta in West Bengal ?
Is Hindi an Indo-Aryan language spoken chiefly in the Hindi Belt region?
Who diminished the hegemony of the Northwestern aristocracy?
How are the two brightest stars different?
Is Bengali spoken in India and Pakistan?
Is European culture integrated into Kerala?
What did Misty assume happened to her Psyduck in the episode that was turned into a book?
What does Libra mean in Latin?
What percentage of the population of Maharashtra is Sikh?
Who was Emperor Wu's father?
What was Meghalaya previously part of?
What other pokemons were added back along with Bulbasaur in order to allow players to experience their Mega Evolution?
Who did Zeus steal from Eos?
Who is Cecrops I in Greek mythology?
Did science see a huge step back during the Han dynasty?
Which state was renamed as Tamil Nadu in 1969?
What language did Tagore use to write Jana Gana Mana?
What is the previous evolution stage of Ivysaur?
When does Venusaur receive the most nutrients from its flower?
What is the four seasons of Karnataka?
Does Maharashtra have one of the highest per capita energy consumption among all Indian states?
Do Mandarin dialects typically havemany vowels?
What was the entire constellation of Libra considered to be?
What is Sagittarius represented as?
The Sui dynasty is between which two dynasties?
Did the Rourans build the Great Wall?
Is Regulus a black main-sequence star?
What is the second-most populous state in India formed on 1 May 1960?
What was one of the roles of using Indonesian as the national language after the Second Youth Congress?
When was the War of the Eight Princes erupted?
Who designed Squirtle as one of the starter Pokémon of Pocket Monsters Red and Green?
Was the Tang Empire at the height of its power until the middle of the 8th century?
How did the King of Jin get his title?
How many students graduate universities in Maharashtra each year?
Which dynasty the Xin dynasty interrupted in 9 AD?
What is the official language of Spain?
What season do monsoons occur the most frequently in Uttar Pradesh?
When was the earliest that Middle Eastern and Turkestan merchants arrived to the Pala Empire?
Did the Shang have any form of keeping written records?
Is Meghalaya a state in northeastern India?
Was Ahmedabad on the top of Forbes' list of the world's fastest growing cities in 2010?
Is Extreme Evoboost available to Eevee in Pokémon Sun and Moon?
Where is the capital of Karnataka? 
The term Hind_ originally was used to refer to the inhabitants of what plain?
Spanish is the most common second language in what country?
Is Virgo located in the second quadrant of the southern hemisphere?
What was the population of the largest city in the world at the time of Tang dynasty?
Is the Idukki Dam India's first arch dam?
How many morae are needed for a syllable type to be a heavy syllable?
Is Mewtwo the final boss in Pokemon Stadium?
What is another name of Dabih?
What was Zu Chongzhi noted for?
What dialect native to the city of Old Dhaka has been gradually declining in popularity since the Bengali Language Movement in the 20th century? 
Is the Small Sagittarius Star Cloud, also known as Messier 24?
Did Dutch colonists work to spread their language in Indonesia?
Did Emperor Wen of Sui as loyal as his name implied?
What constellation is associated with the Greek legend that Aphrodite and her son Eros either shape-shifted into forms of fishes to escape, or were rescued by two fishes?
Under whose rule did Northern Wei become a threat to the Liu Song?
Is it true that Chinese borrowed words from Mongolian and Manchurian peoples as well as English?
What alphabet is Maltese written in?
Can a syllable end with four consonant sounds?
What does Charmander evolve into?
Is Cancer visible to the naked eye under city skies?
Which dynasty's poetry lacks distinction but bridged the gap between the Six Dynasties and the Tang dynasty?
Why did a language divide begin to grow across Gaul?
What size aperture is needed for a telescope to resolve stars within M2?
What are carps that leap over the Dragon Gate turned into?
What Persian word means "to create a mixture"?
Who is the president of Pokémon Company ?
Where did the Mandarin originate?
Is there only one Hindi language recognised officially?
Can Magikarp learn Tackle?
In East Asia, were Tang Chinese military campaigns successful elsewhere than Sui dynasty?
Does Mewto appear in Mewto Strikes back and I'm Not Pikachu!: Pokémon Tales Movie Special?
How much area in square miles does Gujarat cover?
Who was the twenty-first Shang King?
Which pokemon is known as Lizardon in Japan?
In which state do the majority of Buddhists in India reside?
Is Dawki located about 16 Kilometres from Shillong?
When did Wu Zetian rise to the highest seat of power?
What are the capitals of the two kingdoms that used Kannada in administration?
Which language is closely related to Louisiana Creole?
How many components does Pi Sagittarii have?
Is Equatorial Guinea the only Sub-Saharan Spanish-speaking country?
Who was the emperor after Emperor Wen?
Did the bankruptcy of the VOC occur before 1799?
Was there another global language before English?
What is the diameter of the NGC 6445 nebula?
Who boasted to kill every animal on Earth?
Is the Sagittarius one of the constillations of the zodiac?
Are there two main divisions in the history of the Jin dynasty?
Did forest area in West Bengal increase from 2013 to 2017?
At what level can Magikarp learn the Tackle move?
Who was the last ruler of the Chen dynasty?
What do the stars in Aries symbolize?
How far from Earth is Delta Cancri?
Is Buzhu the son of Qi?
What is the state bird of Madhya Pradesh?
 What language was increasingly used for documents and other written forms in the first part of the Galician-Portuguese period (from the 12th to the 14th century)?
How many artillery were in Emperor Yang's army?
Is the sun in Cancer before May?
What two names can be understood as titles of the major Babylonian god of plague and pestilence?
In what state was the first Indian film produced?
Does BJP have political dominance in Rajasthan?
Who was the first to voice the original Mewtwo character in Japanese?
Does Uttar Pradesh have a very low population growth rate?
What are the major economic activities in Andhra Pradesh?
What was Punjab's capital when Saadullah Khan was Grand vizierv of the Mughal empire?
Does Eevee have brown paw pads?
At what level can Bulbasaur evolve into Ivysaur?
Does Indonesian have affixes for different parts of speech? 
Arabic is usually classified as what?
What association is responsible for governing cricket championships in Mumbai?
What is Pokémon games Red and Green known in UK?
Why does Eevee have multiple potential evolutions?
A literature in written vernacular Chinese developed because which form of Chinese language was less apporpriate for oral presentations?
Who was King Wu Ding's most famous consort?
How many major royal tombs were found at the excavation of the Ruins of Yin?
Who commented that "most of us grew up" with Venusaur?
Who is a red, medium-sized finsh?
The judiciary of Kerala consists of how many permanent justices as of 2021?
How many districts and talukas does  Gujarat have?
Did Taizong depose Emperor Gaozu of Tang?
Is Dholavira the largest site of the ancient Indus Valeey civilisation?
How many planets orbit Gliese 876?
Is Spica a star in Virgo?
What percent of Meghalaya lives below the poverty line in urban areas?
Which Generation 6 games can Squirtle be obtained that are not remakes?
For how many months is Virgo visible all night?
Is the nauvari still worn by the majority of women in the urban areas of Maharashtra?
When did Mewtwo first appear in a video game?
What is Andrha Pradesh’s official language?
Ares has been associated with what planet?
How many distance do η Gem (Propus) have away?
What is the brightest star of Virgo?
Which is the most renowned highway in Rajasthan?
Did Buddhism begin to spread and become popular in China during Northern and Southern dynasties?
Who was the ruler of Kshatraps in 100CE?
What does Squirtle's name mean in English?
Why is Virgo constellation associated with fertility?
How many evolutions of Eevee are there?
Fishes is the latin word for what constellation?
What are the main rivers that flow through Andhra Pradesh?
Where can you find the starters from Pokémon Red and Blue in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, Pokémon Platinum and Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver?
Has anyone ever standardized Arabic grammar?
Was Xun Zi more so than iconic intellectual figures such as Mencius during his time?
What is the normal English translation of the rulers of Shang?
Who published Sound Picture Box Mewtwo?
What type is Bulbasaur?
What was China's first imperial dynasty?
Did the Emperor Wen start the construction of the Grand Canal?
Who did Mikey's Eevee defeat?
Petrus Plancius introduced what constellation in 1612? 
What is the native language of the vast majority of the people in Portugal, Brazil and Sao Tome and Principe?
Which state has the 28th-highest ranking among Indian states in human development index?
Is the Gemini constellation extinct?
Was Libra known in Babylonian astronomy as MUL Zibanu?
Which were the first three evolutions of Eevee?
What is the second or third most studied language in the world?
What do the Squirtle Squad originally appear as?
Is the word order in Indonesian the same as Japanese or Korean? 
In what year was the Eta Aquariids originally discovered?
What book served as inspiration to Islamic poets?
In Greek mythology of Aquarius, who sailed for nine days before washing ashore on Mount Parnassus?
What shape does Leo take?
Who restored the Han dynasty after Wang Mang's death?
Is Spanish an official language of the European Union?
What led to the army could also better equip itself with an assortment of bronze weaponry?
Where is the Pink City?
Did the Sui dynasty destroy the Northern Zhou and absorbed the Chen dynasty by 589?
Which of Ash Ketchum's companions have also caught a Bulbasaur?
Is French the most widly spoken mother tongue in the European Union?
Is Sagittarius the last star New Horizons will reach?
Is Capricornus a faint constellation?
For how long was the Roman Empire's collapse?
Which mountain ranges are to the north of Punjab?
Is West Bengal a state in the northern region of India?
Is Rajasthan ranked 5th among Indian states in human development index?
What are some of the classics of the Shang dynasty mentioned in?
What is the population of Gujarat according to the 2011 census data?
What is the most spoken native language within the European Union? 
What is the official language of Meghalaya?
Is November 18 before the peak days of the Leonid Meteor shower that have a radiant close to Gamma Leonis?
Which people is English named after?
Who was initially winning in the conflict betweeo Xiongnu and the Hans dynasty?
How many minor ports does Kerala have?
When feeling threatened, do Squirtles spray lemonade from their mouth?
When is the fall of the dynasty dated?
Which pokemon is known as the Evolution Pokémon?
Was Han dynasty restored from Xin by the son of the Emperor Jing of Han?
Is Russian often transliterated using the Latin alphabet?
How many representatives does Meghalaya have in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha?
In the first century of the Northern Wei empire's existence, did state officials get a salary?
In which year did search engine Yahoo! report Charizard as "one of the top Pokémon-related web searches"?
Who assassinated Emperor Yang?
What is jiedushi?
Who was the first ruler of the Maratha empire?
Is Alpha Librae one star?
What are speakers of English called?
Jigglypuff first appears as one of how many species?
Are any of the Seven Sister States of northeast India mountainous?
What is the official language of Timor Leste?
French is the Romance language of what family?
What Canadian provice has the most French Speakers?
Did the Greeks believe Aphrodite and Eros transformed into fishes?
Which year did Rajasthan form?
Has Venusaur received positive reception?
Who voiced Psyduck in Japanese?
Where was Unserdeutch spoken?
Is German an inflected language? 
What is the sixth most spoken language?
Psyduck is a combination of which two words?
What is West Bengal's main ethnic group? 
What is transformed into G-Max Wildfire when Charizard is Gigantamaxed?
Is Winnie-the-Pooh the same color as Pikachu?     
Whose death led to the War of the Eight Princes?
In what year did the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam party decide to enter politics?
Does Karnataka rank in the top 20 Indian states for Human Development Index?
Mewtwo is featured as what in Pokémon: The First Movie?
How many people live in West Bengal?
Is French the most spoken language by total number of speakers? 
Who founded the Shang dynasty?
How many years did Turkic Ghaznavids ruled Hindu Shahis?
Are Southern Tropical Semi-Evergreen forests found in the western ghats at a height of 500m?
Is Erigone the daughter of Zeus?
Does Meghalaya mean "abodes of rain"?
Did it take less than a year for the idea to feature Charmander and the other Red and Blue starters in a significant role in Pokémon X and Y into the development of the games?
Which Indian state has the largest economy?
What dialect of Urdu mixes vocabulary from Marathi and Konkani, as well as some vocabulary from Arabic, Persian and Chagatai?
How many languages does the Awadhi language with influence from?
How long did the Xin dynasty rule before it was overthrown by rebels?
What is the height of Mount Abu in meters?
How many troops did hid the Shang king maintain at the capital
In what astrology is the Sun is considered to be in the sign Gemini from May 22 to June 21?
How many national parks and wildlife sanctuaries are in Rajasthan?
About what percent of Meghalaya's population depends entirely on agriculture for their livelihood?
Does Maharashtra rank the highest among the Indian States in terms of the human development index?
How many domestic tourists does the biggest and the most cosmopolitan city in India attract annually?
Are there more people who have learned English as a second language than there are native speakers?
Is Spanish the second most used language on the internet?
Was Jiandi the first wife of Emperor Ku?
Who did the celestial scorpion encounter in a Greek myth without Orion?
Who is Team Rocket's leader?
How is Squirtle known as in Japan?
Is Charizard Charmander’s last evolution?
Who is Phaethon's father?
Is Maharashtra the largest state by area in terms of land area ?
What age are the fist tools found in Rajasthan dated back to?
What city covered most of today's north India?
In which series does Charizard help beat Mewtwo?
What caused Germanic languages to integrate into Portuguese?
Who is the founder of the Chen dynasty?
Who seceded Emperor Wen?
Did Liu Zixun waged an unsuccessful civil war against the Emperor Ming of Liu Song in 466?
Is the Desert National Park in Jaisalmer spread over an area of 10,879 square kilometres
What does Ordu mean in the Turkic?
What language options are more popular than French in K-12 schools?
From whom did May receive her Pokemon which evolved into Wartortle?
Is Mewtwo hatched from eggs?
Did Bangali adopt many words from the Arabic language?
What Pokémon's descendant preceeds them in the game's numerical Pokémon index?
How many circles were in Braj Kachru's model of English-speaking countries?
How many districts does Kerala have?
Is Mikey one of the brothers who wasn't hiding the evolved Eevee in the Pokemon anime?
Will an NPC sell the player a Magikarp in Pokémon Red and Blue?
What Indian state does the Puandara Dasa originate from?
While various distinct dialects of Hindi are spoken in rural areas of Madhya Pradesh, what is the official language of the state?
How many teal wings does Charizard have?
Spanish is the primary language in how many countries?
How many constellations are in the zodiac?
What pokemon has remained with Ash the longest?
What was Vayu's first incarnation?
Who colonized India?
Who is the Pokémon Company's president?
What was the GSDP per capita of West Bengal in 2020-21 in US$?
What is the name of the women's costumes for raas-garba?
How many tones do most Mandarin varieties have?
Which country uses Urdu as its official language?
What are the names of the three people who voiced Snorlax
What degree do practitioners using the traditional Indian therapy of Ayurveda hold?
In what year was the throne was passed to Chen Geng or Emperor Wen of Chen?
How many states have Arabic as an official language?
Has the Pokémon Misty would often release by accident evolved in the anime?
Was the name of the woman who induced a famine in Boeotia Ino?
Why Nintendo decided to give Koduck a new name?
The second reign of the Sui dynasty supported which school of Taoism?
What is the color of males' long barbels?
Did the Sui unify the Northern and Southern dynasties?
What is approximately the population of the city benefited from the Luo river?
Which side of the Aravalli Range is the Thar Desert on?
How many countries have Spanish as their official language?
When did Libra stop being part of Scorpius?
What generation was Vaporeon released as a Pokemon?
Is Bulbasaur a starter in Pokémon X and Y?
Is Red and Green the second generation of Pocket Monsters games?
Who voiced the creature's younger self in the Sound Picture Box?
Is the end of Charmander's tail alight with a flame?
What was the original name of Psyduck in Japanese?
Who designed Charizard?
Who was preceded by the Qin dynasty?
Which Game Boy video game did Snorlax first appear in?
Why did Heracles kill the Nemean Lion?
Is alpha Gem the brightest star in Gemini?
Is English an official language of the United States?
What are the three most spoken languages in Meghalaya?
What is the magnitude of the brightest start in Capricornus?
What is the population of Andhra Pradesh?
What loosely wound spiral galaxy was founded by Pierre Mechain in 1780?
Did the Mughals once control the Punjab?
Is French the sole official language in the province of Quebec?
Where did the Shang dynasty rule?
What constellation borders Cancer to the west?
Was valley was the Zhou heartland in?
How many native speakers does Mandarin have?
Does more than half of the Maharashtra population practice Hinduism?
Was the Shang dynasty succeeded by the Western Zhou dynasty?
Where do Psyducks live typically?
What kind of climate does Kerala have?
What district is the largest district in the state?
Who won the battle of Hulao on May 28, 621?
When was Gramática de la lengua castellana written?
What is the only Sub-Saharan Spanish-speaking country?
Why did the attempts of Gun to stop the flooding of the Yellow River fail?
Is Punjab the richest large state in India?
What is the previous evolution stage of Venusaur?
Did east Punjab become part of India in 1947?
Is Kerala known as The Grain Bowl of Kerala?
How many members to the Lok Sabha do the people of Karnataka elect?
Was Wang Mang successful in outlawing slavery?
What is the official language of Taiwan?
What type is Psyduck?
Did Chang'an have low population?
What has become a major issue due to poor border control?
Did Emperor Yang of Sui furthrt extended the empire by gaining support from the nomads?
Who regarded the constellation Pisces as being composed of four subdivisions?
Does Gujarat have the shortest sea in India?
What was Cao Huan's title after being forced to abdicate?
Who voiced detective Pikachu in the 2019 film Pokémon Detective Pikachu?
What borders the third-largest state by area in India to the west?
Who are three Rana's of Mewar that led resistance to outside rule?
Which character was the focus of a promotion and downloadable content giveaway for Pokémon Black and White?
Is Regulus farther than 70 light-years from Earth?
Is Mandarin an official language in Singapore?
Did West Bengal have one of the top three largest economies in India in 2020-21?
Do Mumbai city, Ajanta, Ellora and the Nature reserves in the state attract tourists to Maharashtra?
Is the most notable Chrizard in the anime the one Ash Ketchum has had ? 
Were the Eastern and Western replaced by the Northern Zhou and Northern Qi after the start of the Chen dynasty?
How many countries use French as an official language?
Is Gujarat located in the North of India?
What state has the largest number of seats in Lok Sabha?
How many states border Maharashtra?
According to 2018 estimates by Ethnologue, what is the 10th-most widely spoken language in the world?
Which pokemon is called the Evolution Pokémon?
Is Qi the child of Jiang Yuan and Emperor Ku?
According to Strabo, how many cities did King Porus's territory contain? 
What constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 60°N?
What led to the passage of the Official Languages Act of 1963
What is the Shang dynasty also known as?
Does Gliese 581g have the ability to support life?
Why can Spanish and Portuguese speakers communicate in written form?
How does Bulbasaur appear in Super Smash Bros. Melee and Brawl?
Due to what type of pollution is Pisces is essentially invisible in or near any major city?
Are wheat, rice, and cotton crops grown in the Punjabi region?
What is the most spoken language?
Is the "rice-bowl of India" among the five largest Indian states?
What kind of policy did the Sui court pursue?
Do Ardhatatsam words belong to one of the five principal categories of Hindi words?
Is Qin dynasty a later dynasty than the Sui dynasty?
What is the language root of Arabic?
Is Russian in the East Slavic branch?
What movement brought new prose style and broke the poetry tradition of the piantiwen? 
Who assembled Records of the Grand Historian?
Did Professor Oak give Green a Squirtle as a gift? 
How many Indian states see Hindi as the official language?
What reception has Charmander received?
Does Mainland China and Taiwan have the same written forms of Standard Chinese?
How did Arabs clean themselves in the toilet?
Is the main component of Altarf an orange giant?
Was the central provinces formed by the British after the Third Anglo-Maratha War?
Did Rana Udai Singh II accept alliance with Mughals?
What does Bulbasaur evolve into?
Who created the Song dynasty?
In colonial Indian Islamic schools, what languages were taught to the Muslims?
Are there more groups of recognized dialect in central China than ones on the southeast coast?
What is the meaning of Leo in Latin?
Did the Sui Dynasty have empress regnant?
What gender is Mewtwo's voice?
Where can you get an Eevee in Pokemon Red, Blue, and Yellow?
Is it illegal to sell alcohol in Punjab, India?
Is Beta Leonis in the middle of the Leo constellation?
Did the British East India Company have control over northern India at some point?
Did all final stops in Middle Chinese disappear in Mandarin?
When was Timor Leste under Indonesian rule?
Do Orionids have a higher velocity than Epsilon Geminid meteors?
In where does Psyduck's appearances became a running gag?
Are the vast majority of people in São Tomé and Príncipe Lusophones?
Who did the Punjabi region ally with and provide resources to during World War I?
Who created Mewtwo?
What percent of India's population is made up of the population of the second most populous state in India according to the results of the 2011 national census?
What constellation lies to the west of Cancer?
Did Liang princes try to eliminate Hou?
How many times had the capital of Shang been moved before settled in Yin
Did Castor and Pollux protect people navigating the seas?
What players are called in Pokémon series?
What is the major economic feature of the Punjab?
Are stars formed in the Bug Nebula?
When did Nintendo publish Sound Picture Box Mewtwo?
How many vowels are there in Indonesian? 
The Jin dynasty conquered Eastern Wu in 280 and united China proper, ending what period?
Did the Shang practice human sacrifice?
Do the small Gond kingdoms originate from Gondwana?
Is Jigglypuff the Japanese original name?
How do players first learn of Mewtwo?
Who was a visionary leader whose conquests helped revived the economy and culture of South China?
What is the redshift of M74?
The Nibelungenlied, whose author remains unknown, can be traced back to which epoch?
Is Ophir a port or region mentioned in the Bible?
Does Arabic have an alphabet?
How far away is κ Gem?
Is the last king said to be nice?
The West Banas River separates Mount Abu from what mountain range?
Is there evidence of trade between Gujarat and Egypt going back 3000 years?
What wiki is named after Bulbasaur?
Is standard Hindi mutually intelligible with standard Urdu?
What was the first dictionary of Japanese in a European language?
Are vegetables grown in the Punjabi region?
When did Han forces expel the Xiongnu from a vast territory spanning the Hexi Corridor to Lop Nur?
What are the four most spoken languages in the United States?
When was Pokémon: Magikarp Jump announced?
Was Emperor Wu vicious?
Who did Emperor Wen model his command after?
Who designed Mewtwo?
How many teeth does Snorlax have?
Was the foreign language that made the highest contribution to Indonesian vocabulary? 
Is Uttar Pradesh the most populous state in India?
Why is Eevee able to evolve into different forms?
Is Rajasthan is divided into 10 districts within seven divisions?
What does gemini mean in Latin?
Madhya Pradesh has the largest reserves of diamond and what in India?
What was the Han-era family like?
How many original subahs were established by Mughal Emperor Akbar?
How many states prohibit alcohol in India?
Does Modern Standard Arabic have more pure vowels than most modern dialects?
Was Helian Ding Helian Chang's brother?
How many moves can Magikarp learn by level in the first generation of Pokémon games?
Which meteor shower peaks in October and is difficult to detect visually?
What is the only Pokémon that was born?
What year did Hou Jing start a rebellion?
What are the Roman counterparts for Aphrodite and Eros?
Who founded the Shang Dynasty?
Who dismissed the armies in the name of Emperor Wu?
Who described the Shang dynasty's founding myth?
Did Wang’s regime suffer from floods?
What happened to the Shang rulers after their dynasty collapsed?
Did Jehangir have more than 5 grandchildren?
What sport did Nitin Kumar play?
How long does the Sun take to pass through the constellation Virgo?
Is the economy of Rajasthan the largest state economy in India?
What did Madhya Pradesh rank among Indian states in human development index?
Did Sikhism convert significant Muslims and Hindus in the Punjab region? 
When was Mewtwo's Watching You! Published?
Did Pushyagupta rule modern-day Junagadh?
What caused discontent from soldiers and officials
What is French's primary anscestor?
Who was responsible for writing the essays that introduced Indonesian to English speakers?
Who wrote the first classic work about Tang?
Who is Pikachu voiced by? 
Was Vinda Karandikar a poet?
Is pop a Gujarati folk music?
When is the name "Uttar Pradesh" formally used?
Is the "Chicken's Neck" of India located in West Bengal?
Was Squirtle's name changed from Squirtle to Zenigame during English localization?
How many districts does Andhra Pradesh have?
What was the longest dynastic regime in Chinese history?
Did Wu Zetian have more than one child?
Is West Bengal is religiously diverse?
What country shares a maritime border with Tamil Nadu?
What dialect thrived in both Old French and Middle French?
What color is Psyduck's hair?
Who voices snorlax in the Japanese versions of the Pokémon anime and the Super Smash Bros.
What is the capital of the Xin regime?
Squirtle was featured in cards from which fast food chain?
How many letters are in the Spanish alphabet?
Who ended the rule of Jin?
Which dynasty was known to have many conflicts with the Han dynasty?
What is the official language of Spain?
Why Jianwen abdicated to his gradnephew Xiao Dong?
Who ruled the Shang after the Shang were defeated?
Is Mandarin considered a prime example of an analytic language?
What is the estimated combined population of the entire Lusophone area? 
Is there debate over the number of vowel sounds in Indonesian?
Who is Charmander rescued by after left by its owner, Damian?
What is the largest language by number of speakers?
Did the second reign of the Sui dynasty promote Northern Louguan school of Taoism?
What was the occupation of the person who noted that the English liked to use the name "Moors" for Urdu?
Is the White Horse Temple China’s second known Buddhist temple?
Did the Sui court support Taoism?
According to Game Informer, which pokemon is "the one you recognise"?
What bodies of water can Magikarp be found in?
What was the first major period for the Russian language?
Who voiced detective Pikachu in Pokemon Detective Pikachu?
What body of water does Maharashta have a coastline on?
Who replaced Emperor Jianwen on the throne?
Is Blastoise the next evolution of Squirtle?
In how many countries is Spanish the primary language?
Which language did Gopi Chand Narang write poetry in?
Who owns a special Eevee that is incapable of evolving in the Pokemon anime?
Liang was an imperial dynasty of which country?
Was color important to Pikachu's popularity?
Is Scorpius located in the Southern celestial hemisphere?
Did Central Asia have chariots before 1200 BC?
What has been the major economic feature of Punjab?
Who said that language is the instrument of empire?
How many divisions are there in the history of dynasty?
At least how many dates for the end of the dynasty have been proposed?
What percentage of Punjab's workforce are farmers?
What is the modern name for the city of Chang'an?
Did the colloquial form of Bengali use simplified inflections?
Is Portuguese the second fastest-growing European language?
Is Bengali and bangla same? 
From what origin is the name Punjab?
Was the ruling Liu family unifed after the death of the Emperor Wu of Han?
Where is the capital city of Gujarat?
What are the four official languages  of Switzerland?
Is Charmander a Water type Pokemon?
Was Xin dynasty after Chu-Han contention?
What color is the shell of Squirtle?
Does Mewtwo have a pleasant personality?
Was an official music video of Magikarp made?
What region of Rajasthan is the Thar desert in?
Has modern Malaysian been influenced by English?
Did Pushyagupta build a dam on the Sudarshan lake?
Is Kerala a state on the Malabar Coast of India?
Whose daughter was Hellespont named after?
Under what conditions can speakers of Urdu and Hindi understand each other easily?
Does Maharashtrian cuisine include a variety of dishes ranging from mild to very spicy ones?
Does Magikarp have any move other than Splash, Tackle, Flail, Pump, and Bounce?
What is the most widely spoken language of Bangladesh?
After what year did the palace eunuchs involve themselves in the Han dynasty's court politics?
Who was chasing green in Pokémon Adventures?
Is the September Equinox currently located in Pisces?
Was Cancer described as Scarabaeus in the Egyptian records?
In Greek mythology of Scorpio, who hunts every winter after Zeus raised the two combatants to the sky?
What two forms do possessive nouns occur in?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the zodiac?
Does Karnataka have a very rich set of cultural communities?
What Spanish dialect has the most speakers?
What do the Javanese people call Scorpius?
Did Hu Xia flee sucessfully?
Which part of the Rajasthan is mostly covered with the Thar Desert?
Is Modern Standard Hindi an Indo-Aryan language?
Who was posthumously known as Emporer Wu?
What other names does Squirtle have? 
Why is it impractical to create a musical narrative of the Xia dynasty?
Is raita part of both a typical traditional vegetarian meal of Uttar Pradesh and a typical festival thali?
Are all adult residents able to vote in West Bengal?
Does Karnataka have a larger GDP or economy?
What forms of merchandise has Jigglypuff been featured in?
How far is the Mawphlang sacred forestfrom Shillong?
What are the three major Chinese philosophies of the Zhou dynasty?
Are cotton and tobacco grown in Rajasthan?
Who had anti-Han policies later abolished by the Sui?
Who wished to kill the children who were rescued by Aries?
According to the 2011 census of India, how many percent more males than females in Karnataka were literate?
Did NASA astronauts in Apollo-Soyuz mission take Russian language course?
In which Central/Eastern European empire was German the language of commerce and government?
What does Rekhta originally mean in Persian?
What parts of Charizard's body changes when Gigantamaxed?
What did the size of a Charmander's tail represent in the Pokemon universe?
What is Squirtle known as in Japan?
What is one of the strongest meteor showers that occurs during the day?
What is Mewtwo's unique birth method in the games?
Do the stars Castor and Pollux appear to be of different colors?
What is the approximate diameter of the Trifid Nebula?
Which European language has mainly been influenced by the Arabic language?
Who was Pikachu designed by?
What is the magnitude of the star Zubeneschamali in the constellation Libra?
Is the Thar Desert located in "the land of kings"?
Was Bhopal the first capital of Madhya Pradesh after Indian Independence?
Is German mainly spoken in West Europe?
How many official languages are there in Singapore?
When was the Sangam period?
Was Ouyang He beheaded after 580?
Does Mewtwo appear in Pokémon Red?
How many total speakers does Portuguese have?
Who was the president of the Phillipines in 1973?
Mumbai was one of the major trading ports of which company?
What port handled 32.04 million tonnes of traffic in the fiscal year 2006-07? 
Did the ancient city of Dholavira belong to the Indus Valley civilisation?
Does Gujarat border Madhya Pradesh to the north?
What color are the barbels of female Magikarp?
Which types of weapons were integral to Shang society?
Is the mitochondrial DNA from the Shang dynasty is similar to northern or southern Han Chinese DNA?
The Romans associated Virgo with which of their goddesses?
Which side of the Aravalli Range is more suitable for farming and watering?
Is Aries recognized as an official constellation now?
What did the Babylonians associate Aquarius with?
Is Rajasthan bordered by eight other Indian states?
When did the Dutch East India Company first arrive in Indonesia?
In September 1999	 what did Nintendo publish that included the CD drama	 Birth of Mewtwo: Pokémon Radio Drama. 
Some dialecst of Spanish phonemic inventory consists 19 consonant phonemes. 
How many people in Uttar Pradesh live below the poverty line?
According to legend, who received a cargo from Ophir every three years? 
Which nebula was discovered by a French comet-hunter and has a pink interior with two dark bands?
Messier 80 was the site of which rare discovery?
Did the Liang dynasty still exist after being preceded by the Southern Qi dynasty?
Which institute aims to advance the Spanish and Hispanic American cultures in non-Spanish-speaking countries?
Why did some early Bedouin observers see a ram elsewhere in the sky?
In Pokemon Yellow, what starter does the player get instead of Eeevee?
Is the large Indian parakeet the largest bird in Meghalaya?
Which ancient dynasty's capital was modern Pedavegi?
Why do so many people in the US speak Spanish?
In which year did Emperor Yang die?
How many exoplanents orbit the stars in Virgo?
What language is spoken my Muslims in Maharashta?
What is the phenomenon peaking the output of the fishing industry during the southwest monsoon?
Which system switched the positions of furrows and ridges between growing seasons?
When did the first museum about Portuguese suffer from a fire?
Which country has the most people capable of understanding English
How far is NGC 6537 located from the earth?
Did the man appointed by Emperor Yao to stop the flooding failed at last?
What is Jigglypuff's talent?
Was Aries always recognized as an official constellation by the International Astronomical Union?
Is Gujarati the second language in Gurjart in 2001?
When is International Mother Language Day?
Do more people speak Spanish than Hindi?
When was the Middle High German period?
Where is the constellation Libra located?
Is the economy of Rajasthan the smallest in India?
How many royal tombs were found at the Ruins of Yin near modernday Anyang?
What generation did Psyduck make its debut in the Pokemon games?
Is Spanish more similar to Portuguese or Italian?
Are there only five Classical languages in India?
How many Indian states have a bicameral state legislature?
What language is Leo's name?
Which language is the most widely spoken in Austria and Switzerland?
When did early Hindi literature come about?
Is it true that Cancer shares no borders with other constellations?
Was Mandarin historically used often in the Chinese Singaporean community before 1979?
Where is the most populous city in Kerala as of 2011?
How many versions of Greek myths of Scorpio attribute it to Orion?
What language does the word Punjab originate from?
What do the Pleiades represent?
Does West Bengal cover an area of 90,000 sq mi?
Has Snorlax received generally positive reception from the media?
How many Buddhist temples were in Eastern Jin?
Who discovered M74?
Is Bengali the official language of Bangladesh?
Does German rank first as a foreign language in the EU in terms of student numbers across all levels of education?  
Which dynasty followed the Liang dynasty?
What language is Cancer's name in?
How far away from Earth is the Sombrero Galaxy?
Who was English originally spoken by?
Which is the most spoken language in the world?
Do more states have Arabic or English as an official language?
What was Gujarat's major religion in 2011?
What is the goal of the game "Eager Eevee?"
What was the posthumous name of the founder of the Jin dynasty?
How come Jigglypuff is popular?
How many letters are in the English alphabet?
Who cited Psyduck as having "endearing dopeyness"?
Does Beta Leonis means "the little king"?
Does Aquarius have negative connotations?
In which year did the era of Kannada newspapers start?
What role does Mewtwo play in the film Pokemon: The First Movie
After the imperial court enacted a series of reforms beginning in 145 BC, who was responsible for appointing the Kings’ staff?
Rainfall occurs in Kerala primarily from June to August and September to December due to what kind of climate?
Did Emperor Chen Xu and Liu Jingyan not have any children?
When was Urdu chosen as an official language of Pakistan? 
What family of languages is English part of?
Does Maharashta have more males or females?
When was the Royal Spanish Academy, founded?
What does Meghalaya mean?
Who was Psyduck a partner to in the film Detective Pikachu?
Compared with Mew, what is a disability of Mewtwo?
Is French the second most common language in Canada?
When did the Government of India set up a committee to prepare a grammar of Hindi?
When was the period of Early Modern English
Does the name of the largest constellation in the zodiac mean maiden in Latin?
How many years did Rajasthan spend to raise the rate of electricity access from 71% to 100%?
What country is Karnataka in?
Is Tamil Nadu biodiverse?
Is Jigglypuff immediately a popular singer among audiences?
What insurrection caused the downfall and ruin of the Liang?
Is the rulers of the Zhou dynasty normally translated into English as "emperor"?
What did Sui unify?
When was Karnataka formed?
What are the official languages of Uttar Pradesh?
What material is the Jin dynasty well known for?
What is the difference between the national and Rajasthan literacy percentages in 2011, rounded to the closest integer?
What is an Algol-type eclipsing binary star?
Who is the trainer of Charizard in Pokemon Origin?
What color does the Lagoon Nebula appear in telescopes to the unaided eye?
Is English the most spoken language in the world?
What other nation does Rajasthan share a border with?
Who is the designer of Charizard for the first generation of Pocket Monsteres games Red and Green?
Is Virgo included in Christian mythology?
What is the native language of the Russians?
Who forms the demographic majority in West Bengal?
Does Panjab produce significant amounts of food?
Are there more men or women in Karnataka?
When are the oldest written traces of Spanish from?
Did the Yin dynasty yield the earliest known body of Chinese writing?
What type of dating was used to show the Erlitou culture flourished 2100 BC to 1800 BC?
What is the most commonly used official language in India?
Was Michele Knotz the first to voice Squirtle in English localizations?
What are the two early forms of the French language?
Who built Luoyang?
Who was Squirtle designed by?
Is the NGC 488 a pair of colliding galaxies located 90 million lightyears away?
When was a Charmander useful in Twitch Plays Pokemon?
Is English one of the official languages of the Government of India?
What is the Portuguese language called in Latin?
Venusaur first appeared in what video games? 
How many peerage ranks are there below the royal ranks? 
What was Pokemon originally called in Japan?
What are the three working languages of the EU?
Did Herschel disprove the asssumption that nebulae were simply unresolved groups of stars was false?
Are Messier 4 and Messier 80 globular clusters?
Does the Geminids peak at the beginning or end of the year?
Was India under British rule after the 18th century?
How many bronze, jade, stone, bone, and ceramic artifacts have been found?
Which dynasties followed the Chen dynasty?
What constellation is south of Libra?
Was the Northern Wei dynasty peaceful?
In 606, which city was the capital of the Sui dynasty?
What at its brightest is the second brightest star in Scorpius?
In what state are the Dilwara Temples located?
Is U Scorpii a slow nova?
Where do shell stars eject gas from?
When did Old English gradually transform through language contact into Middle English?
Is German an inflected language, with four cases for nouns, pronouns, and adjectives; three genders; and two numbers?
What did the uprising of the five barbarians lead to?
What is the name of the oldest seaport in Gujarat?
Is Indonesian taught and used in schools?
How many possible evolutionary forms does Eevee have?
Has Urdu been know by multiple names throughout Hindi?
Is Venusaur a fire type Pokemon?
Does Karnataka take up more than 6 percent of the India area?
Which anime did Eevee first appear in?
Who ranks 29th of the 88 constellations in size?
Was Beijing the capital of the Chen dynasty?
What animal did Zeus raise Orion to the sky with?
Is Jiandi the first wife of Emperor Ku?
Does the time spacing between stressed English syllables vary greatly?
Does Scorpius contain any nebula?
What was the fourth dynasty to rule over Uttar Pradesh?
What is the area of Karnataka?
Does the range of elevation of the plateau go over 2000m?
When did Wu Zetian rise to the highest seat of power?
Pikachu has appeared in all Pokemon video games, except which one?
Who owns the Pokémon franchise?
What is the brightest star in Aries called?
What color is "the little king" star of Leo?
What language is the Bengali spelling system based on?
Is Urdu spoken in the Indian city of Agra?
Are agriculture and allied industries a source of income for more than half of the population?
When were the Portraits of Periodical Offering of Liang created?
What total proportion of books are published in German?
Punjab's foodgrain production has given the state what nickname?
What was Gujarat's second major religion in 2011 ?
What sets Mexican Spanish apart?
Who was the ruler of Western Satraps in 100CE?
The Nibelungenlied was originally written in what German variation?
Is Urdu the largest language in Karnataka?
Has Charizard also make appearance in Pokémon Mystery Dungeon?
In Greek mythology, who saved Zeus from Cronos?
Other than a crab, what animals are Cancer depicted as?
Where are the tombs of the ruling Xiao family?
For how long was Han a de facto inferior and vassal partner of Xiongnu? 
Was Sri Lanka subjext to Portuguese colonization? 
Why is Spanish called castellano?
Was the Tang dynasty successful in dealing with disasters in the 9th century?
Do all the first generation Pokémon get a special DVD during the 10th anniversary of the Pokémon franchise?
Does Mewtwo always have a vicious personality?
Is Saggitarius located between Scorpious and Capricornus?
Was Mewtwo a popular fighter in the Super Smash Bros. series?
In Magical Pokémon Journey who is Jigglypuff's butler
Why was beef off-limits?
What is the area of the Meghalaya covers?
Is West Bengal governed by the United States?
How many scheduled languages are there in the Repulblic of India, other than Hindi?
Who inaugurated the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the Zodiac?
During what battle was Hem Chandra killed?
Who discovered the Crystal Ball Nebula?
Who enacted policies to suppress Buddhism?
What is Psyduck's evolution based on?
Does more than 75% of population in Maharashtra practice Hinduism?
What is described by Sima Qian in the Annals of the Yin?
What is the brightest star in Gemini?
Who developed the hill stations Mahabaleshwar, Lonavala, and Matheran?
How to tell the gender of Pikachu?
Where is Erligang culture located?
Is Gujurat's capital city the same as it's capital?
Does the Sui court pursue a pro-Taoist policy?
What dynasty came after the Sui?
Which star in the Sagittarius constellation is a double star whose one of the components has a magnitude of 10? 
When did emperor Wu died?
How many bright stars does Aries possess?
What are the three Pokemons the trainer can switch between in Super Smash Bros Brwal?
Is it true that Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish contain few similarities with German?
What did The Escapist rank Magikarp on its list of favorite Pokemon?
What is the name of the official Magikarp music video?
Is Mumbai the largest city in Madhya Pradesh?
Who was the last Sui emperor?
Who destroyed the dynasty created by Hou?
Has Squirtle appeared in many Pokemon games?
Parts of what is now Rajasthan were part of the Rajapaksha Civilization, is that true?
Who's mazar is in Laur Hill?
Who established the Xin dynasty?
Resistance from Rana Udai Singh II and Rao Chandrasen Rathore against Mughal rule caused Akbar to kill how many citizens of Chittor?
The Han court under whom gave Confucianism exclusive patronage?
How many bright stars does Aries have?
Is Aretha Franklin one of Gujarat Notable people? 
How long is the Sun in Scorpius?
What title was the founder of the Chen Baxian given?
What ethnic group is indigenous to Gujarat?
How many indigenous languages are present in Indonesia?
What dynasty did the Chen dynasty follow? 
Is the sun in Scorpius on December 12?
Did Sima Yan found the Jin dynasty?
Did Dao Yanzhi usurped the throne of Liu Song and became emperor of the new Southern Qi dynasty?
When do Psyduck's scratch with their claws?
Who was ranked higher in the social hierarchy, farmers, or tenants?
Is Indonesian the most populous nation in the world? 
What leader preceded Skandagupta?
Who founded the Jin dynasty?
In what state is the Bombay Stock Exchange located?
Did the Mughals control the Punjab region after the Sikh Empire?
Why did Mikey's older brothers accepted the fact his Eevee is fine just the way it is?
What was India's first government?
Who is Blue's grandfather?
Which animal appears in the founding myth of the Shang dynasty?
Was Chen the final dynasty of the Northern and Southern dynasties period?
Who was killed Xiao Zhengde?
When is Hindi Day?
Was Modern English only  adopted in parts of North America?
How does Taiwanese standard Mandarin differ from mainland?
Is Bulbasaur a starter in Red and Blue?
What is the location of the Sun on the first day of summer?
How many official languages does Kerala have?
Did the ruler of the Kshatraps  (100 CE) found the Kardamaka dynasty?
What empire was in power when the Vesara style of architecture was used for temples and sculplures? 
How many people spoke English as their second language as of 2016?
Is Bulbasaur a central character in the Pokémon anime?
Is Hindi a protected language in South Africa?
What animal is included at most Kerala festivals?
What are Romance languages often compared to?
When exposed to a "Thunder  Stone", what can pikachu evolve into?
Who created Charizard?
Where did Charizard first appear?
Which pokemon is known as Balloon Pokémon?
Is North American English homogeneous compared to British English?
is January a part of monsoon season in Uttar Pradesh?
Is Cancer visible from New York City?
Which constellation is the Latin name for crab?
Where can non-Indoensian find Indonesian language resources?
Whose sister asked Zeus to raise Orion?
What are the three most useful language for business?
Is Pikachu the only avaiable Starter Pok√©mon featured in the game Pok√©mon Yellow
Do Psyduck swim?
Eeve first appeared in which video games?
Was Chatrapati Shivaji a Maratha ruler?
Is Garos the largest group of population in Meghalaya?
Was Snorlax rated the 25th best Pokemon in 2015?
What is the earliest form of English called?
Is the Leo constellation hard to recognize?
What city do the Pune Marathas belong to?
Was Javanese the native language of the majority of the Indonesian population in 1945?
Where does Uttar Pradesh rank in domestic tourist arrivals among all states of India?
What type is Squirtle?
Selling alcohol is not allowed in Gujarat?
Who defeated Mahipala?
Who was the first to voice the original Mewtwo character in Japanese?
How many Germanic languages are more widely spoken than German?
Which constellation will the Sun be in on the first day of summer in 2600 AD?
Who is the greatest ruler of the Satavahana dynasty?
In 2020, how many speakers of Russian were there in the world?
Did the man highly trusted by Shun succeeded in stopping the flood?
Who suggested that an enemy state called Tufang state of the Fang states mentioned in many inscriptions might be identified with the Xia?
What kingdoms were proved by the Halmidi inscription to be the first to use Kannada in administration?
What animal is Eevee based on?
How is Charmander obtained in Pokémon Yellow?
When was the Chen dynasty conquered by the Sui dynasty?
Has Pikachu's design ever changed?
What is the brightest star in Virgo?
Is Charizard also known as the Flame Pokémon?
When was Xiao Bo killed?
What equalize in November, appearing to radiate in the general direction of the Taurus constellation?
What is the Japanese name for Squirtle?
What is the kingdom where Spanish was originally spoken?
What is the second largest river in Gujarat?
How many speakers of English were there as of 2005?
Why does the Southwest monsoon of Kerala break into two branches?
What season do monsoons occur the most frequently in Karnataka?
What three religions have a significant population throughout Kerala?
Is public reception of Charizard positive?
Were Proto-Basque, Iberian, Lusitanian, Celtiberian and Gallaecian previously spoken in the Iberian Peninsula?
Is Mandarin the official language of more than one country?
Is Portuguese the most spoken Romance language in the world?
Magikarp first appeared in what video games?
What are the three stages of Jigglypuff's evolvement?
Which language was Belenggu originally written in?
When was Emperor Yang  murdered?
Which team has the won the Ranji trophy the most times?
What does Wáng mean in English?
Where can you find Bulbasaur in Pokémon Diamond?
What portion of the Meghalayan population practices Christianity?
What percentage of Pakistan's population spoke Urdu as their native language around 1992?
Which Chilean independent  politician went to many protests dressed in an inflatable pikachu suit?
Did Muhammad Ghori defeat Rao Maldev Rathore at the Second Battle of Tarain?
Which two dynasties had Sui unify?
Why was it unusual Indonesian was adopted as a national language?
What is the end of a Charmander's tail?
Where is Hindi the lingua franca of?
Do Tadbhav words belong to one of the five principal categories of Hindi words?
Does Belgaum airport have interntional operations?
When did Hou Jing Prince of Henan started a rebellion with Xiao Zhengde the Prince of Linhe?
Who is the stepmother of Emperor Jing of Northern Zhou?
When was Indian Punjab divided into Punjab, Haryana, and Himachal Pradesh?
Is the design of Bulbasaur and its evolutions based on a smaller Dicynodont?
How many Eeveelutions are there?
How many schemes has the University of Calcutta been selected under?
Is German a national language in an African country?
Who has been shown deep care to the Pokémon she accidentally caught?
How can Pokémon earn Ribbons?
The concept of Magikarp evolving into Gyarados is based on the Chinese mythological tale in which carps leap over which waterfall?
In the Annals of the Yin, who did the son/daughter of woman named Jiandi help to control the Great Flood?
Which country has the largest population of native Spanish speakers?
What is the most spoken language on the Europe continent?
Is Eta Aquariids first discovered by American astronomers?
Is Spanish a Romance language?
What was the first native name for Bengali?
Are more visitors to Maharashtra domestic tourists or foreign tourists?
Is the country with the seventh largest economy in India also known as "the land of kings"?
Is Delta Cancri a giant-star?
What are the two kinds of syllables?
In what year did Green reprise the role of Mewtwo in the first Pok mon movie?
Were the Anglic languages evolved from a Germanic tribal and linguistic continuum?
Is Maharashtra the largest state by area in India?
What is Squirtle known as in Japan?
What feature does Eevee have exclusively when he was first introduced?
As of the 2011 census, what percent of the Indian population didn't speak Nepali as their first language? 
In 2005, how many newspapers in West Bengal were not in Bengali?
What Indian rebellion occured prior to the Indian Rebellion of 1857?
How is the "foreign cake" cooked?
What does wavelength of Jigglypuff's voices related to in enemy?
Are all Mandarin varieties have 4 tones?
Who murdered the last emperor Yang You of the Sui dynasty?
Where did Emperor Wen confront the naval forces of the Chen?
What is the fastest known nova?
The brightest stars in Libra form what?
How many inhabitants are there in Karnataka at the 2011 census?
What is the name of the constellations in latin which is located in the Northern celestial hemisphere between Pisces to the west and Taurus to the east?
How many constellations were discribed by the 2nd centruy AD astronomer Ptolemy?
Is the Zhou dynasty (1046–256 BC) the earliest Chinese dynasty that could be verified from its own records after the 20th century?
What gives Charmander a major damage bonus?
What school of early Chinese history questions the historicity of the Xia dynasty?
In which century was Pluto discovered?
How many countries consider Russian as their official language except Russia?
Is Madhya Pradesh in central India?
How many strings does an extara have?
Who designed pikachu?
During which Byzantine ruler's reign did Emperor Wen reuinfy China?
Did the Chola clan rule Tamil Nadu in the Sangam era?
Where is Andhra Pradesh?
What was conquered by the Sultanate of Gujarat in 1531?
Does the constellation whose name is crab in Latin has an area of 506 square degrees?
What year was Emperor Taiwu captured?
What group of Central Indo-Aryan Languages does Khariboli belong to?
What is Psyduck known as in Japan?
Did Emperor Wen assemble thousands of boats to confront the naval forces of the Chen dynasty for his northern conquest?
Can Eevee evolve into eight different pokemons?
What is the concept of Magikarp evolving into Gyarados is based on?
Was Shah Jahan the Subahdar of Gujarat?
Is Ahmedabad Railway Station located in Paris?
What was the former name of Tamil Nadu?
Is Leo easily recognizable?
Is Cancer a constellation of the Zodiac?
For Urdu publishers, how use of Devanagari help them?
Who established the Han Dynasty? 
What poem contains a mixed use of Old Saxon and Old High German dialects?
Mewtwo made its live-action animated debut in what 2019 movie? 
According to Hyginus, Aphrodite and Eros while visiting Syria fled from which monster by leaping into the Euphrates River?
Can Pikachu communicate other than saying words other than syllables from his name?
Does Indonesian grammer regularly mark plurals?
May a final short vowel be stressed?
Was Charizard located ouside Japan for the first generation of Pocket Monsters games?
Is it true that many variaties of Mandrins mutually intelligible?
What district lies in the western part of the state and covers a geographical area of 3,714 square kilometres?
Is English the most spoken language in the world?
What is Bulbasaur's design based on?
Is the city of Visakhapatnam in northern or southern India?
What Super Smash Bros. games does Squirtle and Blastoise appear in?
Did Wang Mang prevent Xiongnu from invading China?
Was the 4 military expeditions into Goguryeo one of the factors that causes the Sui to fall?
What is the eighth-most populous country subdivision of the world?
What was the native language in the Delhi region of India?
Were does the first printed mention of the name Rajasthan appear?
The Liang dynasty was preceded by which dynasty?
Which type of Pokémon is bulbasaur?
Did the three major Chinese philosophies begin in Zhou dynasty?
What is the first pokemon in the Pokedex?
Did Rajput kings accept Mughal suzerainty during Akbar's reign?
What is the state animal of Kerala?
What is the distance, in light years, from Earth to the Red Spider Nebula?
What did Liu Shao's assassination of his father in 453 CE do?
What percetange of Chinese population are able to speak Standard Mandarin?
Is Mandarin natively spoken by most of eastern China?
What is the official language of the People's Republic of China?
What is the brightest star in Virgo?
Who developed the Pokémon  series?
How many languages has Portuguese has provided loanwords to?
Did Prithviraj Chauhan defeat the invading Muhammad Ghori in the Last Battle of Tarain?
Is the Sarabeswara (Shiva) Temple titled Great Living Chola Temples among the UNESCO World Heritage Sites?
When did  the oldest group of Jews in India reach Kerala?
After the partition, the Punjab region was split into which two countries?
Did Christiannity largely replace Buddism in Punjab?
How long did the attempts of Gun to stop the flooding of the Yellow River last?
Is Li Bai one of China's most famous poets?
What does it mean to be a compact Shapley class II cluster?
Is NGC 7293 close to Earth?
Is October a winter month in Andhra Pradesh?
Were the Greeks the first to discover the Scorpius constellation?
Is the father of Yu the Great appointed by Emperor Yao to stop the flooding?
What percentage of Bangladeshis do not Bengali as their first language?
Is Andhra Pradesh the largest state?
In what generation is the Galarian Champion Leon?
Are events concerning the Yin dynasty mentioned in Zuo Zhuan?
Is German one of the major languages of the world?
Why was there an exponential growth in large estates after the abandonment of the equal-field system?
Is Portuguese an official language of NATO?
How many evolutions does Eevee have?
Did Snorlax appear before Episode 40in the Pokémon anime?
What is the reward for winning a Pokémon Contest?
Which city is the gateway of the Thar desert?
Why did Afghan take over?
What three countries are full members of La Francophonie?
Is squirtle the main character in the movie Detective Pikachu?
Is Portuguese taught in schools in Uruguay?
Why does the Omega Nebula have many names?
Are phrases made up of clauses?
Did Charizard appear in all entry of the Super Smash Bros?
Did Venusur appear in Pokémon games Red and Green in Japan?
How did the alliance between the Jin Dynasty and Tuboa affect these states?
Did Squirtle evolve in the main series games?
What is the largest group of people in Uttar Pradesh?
Does Soenjono Dardjowidjojo believe that Indian is a trully national language?
What month does the sun first appear in Aries?
What year did the Old Portuguese period end? 
Where is the Low Malay was commonly used?
How many distinct syllables does Standard Chinese have?
When was Urdu recognized as the sole national language of Pakistan?
Why did recently established northern states refer Sima Rui's empire as "Langya"?
Is running a verb past particle?
Who was the dominant global power following the Second World War?
Who is Pikachu's companion?
Who had "slightly surpassed Venusaur in terms of popularity" since Red and Blue, according to IGN's Pokémon Chick?
Who founded the Jin dynasty?
What was considered dishonorable during marriages in the Han era?
What is the Japanese word for mystery or miracle?
When did the Jin dynasty start?
Did multiple generations of extended family members did not occupy the same house in the Han era?
What is the magnitude of Gem (Pollux)?
Who is the fater of Emperor Yang?
How far is Geminga from Earth?
Which planetary nebula does NGC 6440 appear close to?
The Russian alphabet consists of how many letters?
How many countries use French as official language
How much is Lucy Stevens paid in Detective Pikachu?
What is the official language of Monaco? 
Which Indian state has five rivers based on its name?
What year did the Mughal emperor Akbar conquer and annex the Sultanate of Gujarat to the Mughal Empire? 
How many species must the player record information on before Cerulean Cave can be accessed?
What is the magnitude of the brightest star in the Beehive Cluster?
Where did Chen Baxian meet Xiao Bo to attack Lý Bôn?
In what region were gender differences between Pikachu implemented?
Does M74 have clusters of young stars?
Is Magikarp seen as useless?
Did Urdu ever have multiple standards?
Is Sigma Sagittarii the brightest star in the Sagittarius constellation?
What was the title of Sima Yan's father?
When did the Sui dynasty absorb the Chen dynasty?
What is the Xin Dynasty known in Chinese historiography?
Which language is the official language of the state of Karnataka?
Is it true that the vast majority of Pakistani Punjabis are Sunni Muslims?
When did Viz Media publish the children's picture book "I'm Not Pikachu!"?
How old is Beta Aquarii?
What forms the base of the Indonesian Language?
Which dynasty did Zhou dynasty follow?
Is Aries a relatively dim constellation?
Is the population density of Maharashtra higher than the National average?
Is English the only official language of the United Nations?
Which ruler of Girinagar built a dam on the Sudarshan lake?
Does Japan have more Portuguese-speaking immigrants than France?
Does Gujarat have a high Jewish population?
Does more than one constellation cross the galactic equator, celestial equator, and ecliptic equator?
Is NGC 6302, also called the Bug Nebula, located within in the constellation Scorpius?
What French Creole language is the other official language of Haiti, other than French?
How many presidents did Indonesia have in its first 53 years of independence?
Where were the research notes that say that scientists discovered a new Pokémon in a Guyana jungle?
Does the presence of several letters in the script for the same sound in the Bengali language results in inconsistencies?
How many troops did the Sui amass in 588 along the northern bank of the Yangtze River?
What is the oldest Sangam work we have knowledge of?
Who was regent after Sima Yi's death 
What is the capital of Meghalaya?
Which is the most-used language on the Internet?
What part of the country is Luoyang in?
Does all syllables consist of an initial consonant, a medial glide, a vowel, a coda, and a tone?
When did Chen Baxian established Chen dynasty?
Is Bengali the second most spoken Indo-European language?
In the anime, who has a Psyduck that she accidentally caught in Hypno's Naptime?
Are there 35 verified exoplanets oribiting the 29 stars in Virgo?
What type of passive was formed by the addition of endings to the mood forms?
Does the latest classification of Chinese tend to follow provincial boundaries?
What do Chikorita and Bulbasaur have in common?
Are Magikarp's fins white?
Rounded to the nearest month, for how many months during the year does the Sun appear in the constellation Aquariius, as of 2002?
Is Spanish an official language on Easter Island?
Was the name of Northern Wei come from Prince of Wei?
Is Madhya Pradesh the largest state in India by area?
Which city is the seventh largest city by population in India?
Did later Chinese dynasties use elements of Taizong's legal code?
What do the terms Safaitic and Hismaic mean?
Is Karnataka's unemployment rate more than the national average?
Is Spanish spoken in some major American cities?
In Nepal	 is Urdu a registered regional dialect? 
When did Liu Jun die?
What does Psyduck use to scratch if threatened?
How many stars of first or second magnitude are there in Leo constellation?
Which country has the largest Russian speakers in the world in 2010?
What is the three-circle model?
What percentage of Angola speaks Portuguese fluently?
Is Classical Arabic prescriptive?
Does Gujarat contain one of the largest and most prominent archaeological sites in India?
Where can you find Asiatic lions in the wild?
Has a burial site in modern Beijing been found with utensils from the Erligang culture?
Was the nationalization of iron industries in the Han dynasty permanent?
Does Karnataka have less nationally protected monuments than Uttar Pradesh?
How many national parks and wildlife sanctuaries are in Rajasthan?
What is the Liang dynasty?
How many major dialect regions exit in England?
What is Sagittarius commonly represented as?
What is the official language of Kerala?
What region of Italy is French considered an official language of?
Who set up the fengjian system?
Is the future subjunctive mood still commonly used in Galician?
Is Eridanus water-related constellations?
What are the closest regions of active star formation in the Taurus constallation?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the sky?
What emotion Jigglypuff feel when it inflate its body like a balloon or flatten its body?
Which two stars were regarded as minor gods and were called Meshlamtaea and Lugalirra?
Coud poor people join government bureaucracies by taking exam?
Is the e silent in cake?
What is the major religious group in Pakistan
Who voiced Pikachu in the first version of the anime?? 
What is the modern symbol for Cancer?
Does Nepali have additional official language status in all of West Bengal?
Did the Liu Song dynasty suffer from incompetent emperors?
Is Li Yuan voluntarily retired?
Did Emperor prefer Northern culture?
What is the closest known white dwarf?
In the games, Mewtwo is consistently noted as what?
Is Pokémon Snap part of the main Pokémon game series?
Who received a Bulbasaur from Professor Oak in the Pokémon Adventures manga?
How many sovereign states use English as an official language?
When did spoke-wheeled chariots appear in China?
Who was Tipu Sultan's father?
When was Uttar Pradesh established?
What are sometimes referred to as the Cat's Eyes?
What does Virgo mean in Latin?
Which Pokémon was the primary  mascot to make the early comic  book series more "engaging"?
Is pollution threatening animals in Karnataka?
In Pokémon Red and Blue, who is Mewto's parent creature?
Is the largest zodiac constellation prominent in the spring sky in the northern hemisphere?
What are the three major seasons in Madhya Pradesh?
Who voices Squirtle in Japanese?
Is Indonesian the official and national language of Indonesia?
Has Charizard saved both Ash and Pikachu's lives
How far is Ranthambore National Park from Sawai Madhopur Railway Station?
Who fasted to death in 1952?
In which present day Indian state was the ancient city of Lothal located?
Is a lot of the religious diversity within Punjabis a recent change?
Were all the Pokémon games where Psyduck appears available worldwide?
Who is constantly stunned by its headache?
Did Emperor Wen use naval forces in his campaign to conquer the Chen dynasty?
How many branches are Germanic languages traditionally subdivided into?
How many unprotected monuments are in Karnataka?
When was the establishment date of the Zhou dynasty?
What region is Snorlax from?
Has Pikachu ever been featured in a music video?
Which Bengali word was derived from the ancient kingdom of Banga?
Did the Escapist listed Squirtle as 30th of their favorite Pokémon
Who did Muhammad Ghori defeat at the Second Battle of Tarain?
In what year was the Chen dynasty conquered by the Sui dynasty?
Which dynasty overthrew the Xia dynasty?
Does German use a significant amount of loanwords from Greek?
What famous Wang Tong work was published posthumously?
Did PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure faithfully represent Magikarp's moves?
Who attempted and failed to conquer Gujarat and annex it to his empire in 1197? 
What group of anime episodes does Charmander first appear in?
Who owns the Eevee that was experimented on by Team Rocket?
What was Liu Yu's career?
Who designed all the Eeveelutions except for Jolteon and Flareon?
Does Psyduck only live in lakes?
What is the name given to the flame at the end of a Charmander's tail?
Who is English named after?
When is the sun considered to be in the sign Leo?
Is Kerala very religiously diverse?
How many World Heritage sites is Uttar Pradesh home to?
Did Wang Mang become a more influential political figure than the others in his family?
Who succeeded Lý Bôn?
Squirtle is voiced in Japanese by who?
When did Pikachu first appear in Japanese video games?
What is the trend in the popularity of the Urdu language?
Do Karnataka's public health services satisfy the entire state?
Where does the earliest identifiable reference to Aries as a distinct constellation come from?
In what year the Kerala government introduced free sex reassignment surgery?
Which is the second official language of the Indian state of Jharkhand?
Is Standard Mandarin Chinese one of the official languages of the United Nations?
When was Equatorial Guinea accepted as a part of The Community of Portuguese Language Countries?
Is Venusaur capable of Mega Evolution? 
What is the estimated total number of deported people from East Taihangshan to Datong during the reign of Emperor Daowu?
Was the last Sui emperor Yang Guang a poet?
How far away is the star Fumalsamakah?
What influenced Pajasthani cooking, so they prefer food that could last for several days and could be eaten without heading? 
What is between Aquarius and Aries?
Besides Bengali, are there any other official languages in Bangladesh?
Why didn't Javanese adopted as the national language?
What was at the center of the Grand Canal?
What is the most spoken language in the European Union? 
What invention led to the development of a number of printers' languages (Druckersprachen) aimed at making printed material readable and understandable across as many diverse dialects of German as possible?
Who was Chen Shubao's mother?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the sky?
Did European traders reach West Bengal in the early 11th centuries?
What were the stars of Pisces incorporated into in Chinese astronomy?
In what Italianian province is German the official language?
What is the total number of Spanish speakers?
Who was allowed to attend to Chen Shubao’s recovery period?
Did the Xiongnu defeat the Hans?
How many Southern dynasties came before the Liang dynasty?
Was more than 90% of the Armenian population fluent in Russian in 2006?
Which English syllable part is mandatory and consists of a vowel sound?
How many Urdu newspapers does India have? 
Is Spica a bright star?
Who did Hou sack in 549?
What is the highest civilian award bestowed  by the Government of Karnataka?
Which cluster is primarily made up of yellow elliptical and spiral galaxies, at a distance of 3.6 billion light years from Earth?
Who conquered England in 1066?
El Nath and which eclipsing binary star are separated by 8°?
What is the Geminids?
Who voiced Mewtwo in English in the film?
Why were Chen Shubao's generals disgruntled?
Which part of Maharasthra did the British govern as a part of the Bombay Presidency?
Which two person voiced Psyduck?
Was there regulation on agriculture in the Zhou dynasty?
In the anime series, how  old does Ash Ketchum turn?
Is the copula missing in the present tense in Russian?
Who authored "New Songs of Yutai"?
Which mountain range is also known as the Sahyadri Range?
What caused M87 to be a major radio source?
Who is the Greek astronomer that identified 48 constellations in the second century? 
Is the Mandarin used as the daily language in Hong Kong and Macau?
Is Gujarat the tenth most populous state?
How far from the Earth is the Omega Nebula located?
When did the dynasty and central government went into decline?
Is West Bengal one of the top five most populous states?
Who designed the Charizard for the first generation of Pocket Monsters games Red and Green?
Who founded Jin dynasty?
Did the author of Zhongshuo hold office as Secretary of Shuzhou after 617?
What is a Portuguese-speaking person or nation referred to as?
In what episode did the Eevee of the youngest Kimono girl evolve?
Which country in African speaks Portuguese?
What is the first dynasty in traditional Chinese historiography?
Is the Zhou dynasty the longest regime in Chinese history?
Who gained Mumbai in the early 17th century?
Was Urdu widely spoken in Pakistan before it became the official langauge in Pakistan?
Is the public perception of Bulbasaur positive?
What was Eevee going to be originally named before the English versions of the games were released?
Most Mandarin varieties have how many tones?
Who created Psyduck?
Is the Milky Way on the edge of the Sagittarius constellation?
What country has the most native English speakers?
On which date did the Karnataka state government advise colleges to guarantee that "clothes which disturb equality, integrity, and public law and order should not be worn"?
Was the Vijayanagara Empire established by Harihara Raya?
What is event is held at the Shipra River every 12 years?
What is Jigglypuff's role and personality in Pokemon manga?
Was the northern China divided before 439?
Which tree is used for living root bridges?
Were there any important differences between Zhou dynasty and medieval Europe?
What is the area of Cancer?
How many students in Goa were learning Portuguese in 2014?
Was the Malay language popularly spoken in Indonesia during the 1600s?
When was Bengal partitioned into West Bengal and East Bengal?
Was Northern Wei the second of the Northern dynasties?
When did Wu Mingche capture Shouyang?
Whose nickname inspired Snorlax's habit of constantly eating and sleeping?
When was Alexander's Invasion of Punjab?
Why is Virgo easy to locate?
What is the name of the fan wiki named after bulbasaur?
Did the Northern Wei dynasty go to war with the Song dynasty?
Who voiced Mewtwo in Pokémon: The First Movie?
Was the development of Icelandic and Faroese influenced by a long series of invasions by other peoples and languages?
Did Atsuko Nishida design Flareon?
What game features a Pikachu as the only available Starter Pokémon?
Is Rajasthan a state in northern India?
Where was Gramática de la lengua castellana written?
Why did the highland plateus of Meghalaya have rich soil?
Is the Standard Mandarin used outside of the Chinese community of Singapore?
What years did the Salankayanas rule?
Was Xiao Cha installed as emperor of Liang before Emperor Yuan was killed?
Who was the son of Emperor Fei and Empress Wang of the Chen dynasty?
When does the Sun appear in the constellation Libra?
In the 16th century, which Mughal general conquered Bengal?
Is Karnataka the largest state in India by area?
Does Rajasthan rank 1st among Indian states in human development index?
What is the name of the coastal area in West Bengal?
The lion's tail is marked by which star?
Is Spanish (español or castellano, Castilian) a Romance language?
What is the largest Indian state by area?
What are the major seasons of Madhya Pradesh?
In spring 585	 the governor of which province ambushed and killed Li Yun? 
Did Hou kill Xiao Zhengde and attempt to suppress those who would not submit to him?
Did the Tang dynasty want to enhance the dependency on aristocratic families?
Who introduced the name Urdu for the first time?
What is the historical and current capital of Punjab?
What is the magnitude of 40 Leonis?
Who established Han dynasty?
What is the difference between Bulbasaur's typing and the other Generation 1 starter's typing?
Is Virgo a constellation of the zodiac?
In the fourth generation of the Pokemon video game series, can Mega Mewtwo X be activated by giving Mewtwonite X to Mewtwo?
What does Magikarp evolve into?
Is Antares a bright star?
Was Chen a dynasty after Liang?
Is eevee Liz Finnegan's favorite Pokémon?
Did Shun trust Yu?
Has modern northern Sichuan ever had rebellion?
What is the headquarters of the North Eastern Railway?
Did English descend from different ancester than Dutch?
Which two games of the Super Smash Bros. series does Charizard appear as a playable character? 
Which Chinese era does the legend of Hua Mulan origiate from?
What does the three-pointed fin on Magikarp back resemble?
Does Psyduck appear weak because it is weak?
Where was the most powerful bandit groups loacated?
What is the second-most populous state in India?
What team created Pikachu?
Did Chen dynasty exist in 558?
What is the world's first-most spoken native language?
Can "won't" be used to indicate usage of the future tense?
What year did Western Wei launch a major attack on Jiangling
What was the Latin spoken in Gaul called?
Does German have the highest number of consonants in comparsion with other languages?
Does Tamil Nadu have the largest economy in India?
How many well-known star clouds does Saggitarius contain?
The qiaoren were free from what special poll tax?
What move is learned by Magikarp at level 15 in Generation 2?
Who is Jigglypuff voiced by in English?
Did Ash Ketchum acquire Pikachu for his birthday? 
How many parties dominate politics in West Bengal?
Was capricornus explicitly recorded in the Babylonian star catalogues before 100 BCE?
What year did the Sui absorb the Chen dynasty?
Does any portraits of the Periodical Offering of Liang by the Emperor Yuan of Liang exist?
How many protruding teeth does Snorlax have?
What animal inspired Pikachu's design?
How many stars form the body of “the Teapot” in Sagittarius?
Are penguins a common animal species present in Maharashtra?
What did Tomy do when they found needles in stuffing of Charizard soft toys?
What can be an example of using German in official proceedings and literature?
When did local Chinese schools of Buddhist thoughts start to flourish?
What does a Shapley class II mean?
Does Indonesian have the status of a working language in Timor Leste?
Was Jiandi the first wife of Emperor Ku?
Who helped Yu the Great to control the Great Flood?
Yang Xiong made advancements in what field during the Han dynasty?
Who designed Charmander in Pokémon Red and Blue?
What color is a Psyduck?
Is π Capricorni visible to telescope?
Does Maharashtra have the highest amount of recorded forest area among all Indian states?
Who murdered Rajyavardhana, the Buddhist king of Thanesar?
Which invasions into France greatly influenced the beginning of French? 
Is Maharasthra the most populous state in India
As of 2011, what percentage of West Bengal's religious population are Hindus?
What is the largest constellation in the zodiac?
Why is Charizard iconic in the Pokémon Origins series?
Who created mewtwo?
Into which written script did oracle script and bronze script evolve?
Are local languages like Javanese spoken in formal education?
How many native speakers do the Spanish language has, as of 202?
Is Acacia widely spread in the southeast of the range?
How many native speakers does Spanish have?
In what game was the first Eevee Pokemon species introduced?
What philosophy did Duke of Zhou follow?
Did the Han dynasty force commoners to move to frontiers?
Is it true that Spanish is one of the most taught foreign language Alongside English and French?
Are different accents and dialects of English the same gramatically?
Does the state of Meghalaya lack of mountains?
Were did the Andhras leave north India from?
Is Mandarin natively spoken by most of northern and southwestern China?
Where was the first capital of Western Jin?
How tall is Pikachu? 
Who founded Tang dynasty?
What abou Psyduck tricks its enemies into thinking it is weak?
When was the court conference that convinced the majority that the Xiongnu realm will fall into chaos? 
Which state has the second-largest arid region in India?
What is the national song of India?
Is Urdu the official language of Pakistan in 1946?
Do Psyduck remember using their powers?
How many German speakers are there in Namibia?
What standard German-based pidgin language	 that is nearly extinct today	 evolved in Namibia? 
Why did Tsunekazu Ishihara state that Mewtwo would be popular amongst North American audiences?
Are Hindi words traditionally divided into six principal categories according to their etymology?
At what evolution stage does Bulbasaur's bulb turn into a large flower?
Prior to the third century BCE	 most of Karnataka formed part of what empire?
When did Emperor Ping of Han die?
Who is the best Pokémon in the Red and Blue games?
What is the world's most spoken native language?
Was the capital of the Western Jin initially in Chang'an?
Is the only Indian state to have a Christian majority Meghalaya? 
What have Hindu Brahmins in Bengal been practising since the first millenium BCE?
Is Spanish the most used language on internet websites?
Does Jigglypuff only appear in Nintendo games?
Does Snorlax participate in the Sumo Conference?
Is the article used for singular and plural nouns the same?
Who compiled and authored "The Oriental Linguist"?
Is Spanish currently an official language of the Phillippines?
Why would the Jigglypuff run out of air?
What rod do you need to fish with to find Magikarp?
What state did Meghalaya used to be part of?
Is Munshi Premchand considered as the most revered figure in the world of Hindi fiction and progressive movement because he introducting romanticism in Hindi Prose Literature?
Did Misty's Psyduck evolve in the anime?
When did Charmander return?
What dynasty preceded the Tang dynasty?
Is Uttar Pradesh a state in northern India?
Is French the most widely spoken language in the EU?
Is the language adopted as the third official court language in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi a protected language in South Africa?
The recent excavations in which archaeological site suggested that Alagankulam was one of the important trade centers of the Sangam Era?
What did the Sui unify?
Did natural science publications or humanities publications have a higher percentage of articles written in English?
How many fingers does Charmander have in artwork drawn by Ken Sugimori?
Xiao Yan had been the general under whose reign before becoming the Emperor Wu of Liang dynasty?
How many is Capricornus' alpha star magnitude?
Is the black hole in M87 heavier than the Sun?
Is it true that General Gao Huan's son established the Northern Qi
What is the name of the constellation associated with the ritual sacrifice of cattle?
Is the name of Gujarat derived from a dynasty from over 10000 years ago?
In Braj Kachru's three circle model, is Malaysia in the inner circle?
How long did Emperor Wu's liquor monopoly last?
How many letters does French use?
Does Karnataka have more nationally protected monuments than Uttar Pradesh?
Where is German especially widely taught?
Did women work and make money?
From which language is most of the lexicon of Portuguese derived?
What empire fell in the Battle of Tolikota?
How many districts is Uttar Pradesh divided into?
Did the stars of the constellation first recorded in Almagest lie within the Vermilion Bird of the South in Chinese astronomy?
What was ranked as the "second best person of the year"
What was last major region of India to be annexed by Britain?
In the Joy of Pokémon, who is a friend of Joy?
Who is known as the Flame Pokémon? 
What may a French-speaking person or nation be referred to as?
Does Bengali require a lot of inflection?
When did the Jin dynasty exist?
Where do the stars of Cancer lie within in Chinese astronomy?
Did Bulbasaur debut as a starter Pokémon in a video game?
What is the first evolution of Bulbasaur?
How did the oracle bones help create the king lists?
Did Wu Zetian killed her son to make Gaozong's empress demoted?
How many native species of gymnosperm does Tamil Nadu have?
Whose defeat marked the beginning of the Zhou dynasty?
Who did the Northern Zhou and Northern Qi replace?
Who befriends a giant Magikarp in The Joy of Pokemon?
From what mythology does the way of evolving Magikarp into Gyrados in Pokémon Snap originate?
Is Nergal's stinger positioned higher than its tail?
Where was the ruler who was killed at the Second Battle of Panipat on 5 November 1556 born in 1501?
Did the Great Wall construction in Sui strain the economy and anger the resentful workforce employed?
What is the brighest visible region of the Milky Way?
Is Urdu the only official language in Pakistan?
Who described Eevee as "enduringly popular"?
What language do people who share no native language often speak?
Are there seven official languages in the United Nations?
French evolved from what?
When did Emperor Wu annex Nanue?
Is Linum Boreun a subdivision of the constellation Pisces according to Johannes Hevelius?
Does Scorpius contain a blue star, a red star, and a yellow star?
What destabilized Wang Mang's regime?
Into what three groupings are English dialects divided by linguists?
When exposed to a moon stone, what does Jigglypuff evolve into?
What was the main staple crop before the Tang dynasty?
How many central characters in the Pokemon anime have a Bulbasaur?
Has the decadal growth rate of population always  remained higher than the national average in  Maharashtra since independence?
Did the modern Marathi language evolve from the Maharashtri Prakrit?
Is there a difference between male and female Bulbasaurs?
What are the first three eeveelutions?
Which locations became the principal centers of Muslim rulers' power in Rajasthan?
Where did Portuguese origin from?
Do more people speak Urdu or Tamil in Karnataka?
Can squirtle move on all four feet?
According to the 2011 census of India, were there more males or females in Karnataka being literate?
Which galaxies are part of the Leo triplet?
Did the early Western Han court simultaneously accept multiple philosophical teachings in making state decisions and shaping government policy?
Was it difficult for Chen Baxian to defeat the Northern armies?
What state did the alliance between Jin dynasty and the Tuoba fight against?
What movie did Kotaro Watanabe voice Mewtwo?
What are the dark bands on the interior of NGC 6514 called?
Is  Gujarat the second longest coastline in India?
Can you classify languages based on rhythm? 
Who witnessed the pinnacle of menfa politics?
In what country is Portuguese required in school? 
Did Ptolemy identify more than 50 constellations?
Was the Chera dynastry the third prominent kingdom based in Kerala?
Did local varieties of Bengali have any official status in Gupta Empire?
Is Russian a rather heterogeneous language?
What Pokémon type is Pikachu?
Which native Celtic languages was French influenced by?
In India, how many official languages are there?
Where does the majority of the world's French-speaking population live?
What language is the Quran written in?
Is NGC 6445 near NGC 6440?
Where did a large number of Kerala residents emigrate to?
Is Leo bright?
What is the Shang Dynasty also known as?
Is French a romance language? 
Is Raja Harishchandra a silent movie?
Is Kolkata the third-largest metropolis in India ?
How many Kimono girls have evolved Eevees?
What is Regulus?
Who was appointed by Emperor Yao to stop the flooding? 
What was China’s first imperial dynasty?
Could half of the total population could speak Dutch in 1940?
Who was Han Zhao?
In which region is Aquarius found?
What corresponds to the Hindu nakshatras Anuradha	 Jyeshtha	 and Mula? 
What movie has Magikarp appeared in?
Was the planet Neptune discovered near a star in Capricornus?
Is Cancer invisible to the naked eye under city skies?
What astronomical body is M35 similar to in size?
When did Xiao Yuanming arrive at Jiankang to take the throne?
Do the Orionids occur during the month of October?
Who designed most of the Eeveelutions?
Who is oldest son of Sima Zhao?
How many official languages does Singapore have?
Is French the third most widely spoken mother tongue in the European Union?
Does Indonesian orginally have a lot of native speakers?
Can an English syllable start with four consonant sounds?
When did the Jin dynasty of China exist?
Is Libra relatively bright?
How did Jiandi give birth to Xie?
Who was Xiao Zong's father?
What else did the god Amon-Ra represent apart from creativity?
Are Pollux and Castor similar stars?
When was the first Great Wall since the Han dynasty built?
Did the Yin dynasty rule in the Yellow River valley in the second millennium BC?
Is Snorlax ranked the best Pokemon?
How many constellations did Ptolemy identify?
Did stars from Andromeda form a part of the porpoise?
Was Venusaur given a Mega Evolution in Pokemon X and Y?
How many official languages does the United Nations recognize?
Charizard is a pormanteau of what?
When does the Taurid meteor shower appear?
Poet Li Bai was famous for which style of peotry?
At what level does Charizard evolve?
Does Uttar Pradesh have an arctic climate?
Is Andrha Pradesh a major producer of rice?
Which gender of Pikachu has a heart-shaped appearance tail in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl?
Which state borders Andhra Pradesh in the north-west?
What deep-sky objects does Scorpius contain?
How many consonant phonemes do most English dialects share?
Is the reason the Han dynasty is split into Western and Eastern Han is because of the Xin dynasty?
What is the total population of Rajasthan?
Were the earth walls at Zhengzhou more than 25 m wide at the base and inherited from previous Chinese cultures?
Did Emperor Wu annex Nanyue before annexing Dian?
The Spanish language evolved from which Latin?
What is the proper name for Beta Aquarii?
What color are Eevee's eyes?
Was Portugal and Galicia part of the same political entity in history? 
Which star of Libra ejects gas from their equator?
Did Wei Rui’s attack at Luokou and Hefei to Northern Wei happen in about the same year?
Is the Gujarati food primarily pescatarian?
What is the largest city of Western Switzerland?
Is the first quasar ever to be identified also the optically brightest quasar in the sky?
What did the Zoroastrian refugees  become known as?
How many official languages does Rajasthan have?
Do the brightest stars in Libra form a hexagon?
Is Portuguese the fastest-growing European language?
Is Hindi a form of Hindustani?
Is Urdu used in the higher echelons of Pakistani government?
When did Wang officially proclaim the Xin?
Does Gujarat have what is considered to be one of the oldest seaports?
What mechanic was removed from the three linked Pokémon were linked in Super Smash Bros. Ultimate?
Who is Xie's descendant?
Why are Pollux and Castor somewhat misnomers for the stars?
Are there multiple branches of government in West Bengal?
Does Snorlax possess a unique Z-Move?
Is the coastal Sundarbans not in West Bengal?
What is the occupation of Ken Sugimori?
Why is Charizard pokemon popular in North America?
What drives Andhra Pradesh's economy?
How many people speak Levantine Arabic?
From what kingdom was the medieval language from which Portuguese evolved from?
Which company gained Mumbai as one of their major trading ports and slowly expanded areas under its rule during the 18th century
Is Kannada one of the most spoken languages in Meghalaya?
Who instigated the Yellow Turban rebellion?
Was Qutbuddin Aibak successful in his attempt to conquer Gujarat?
What Egg group does Charizard belong to?
Is Pikachu important in Japan?
What is the official language of Kerala?
Is Uttar Pradesh the smallest state in India?
When was the State of Mysore renamed to Karnataka?
When was Rajasthan formed?
What happens if Charmander's tail goes out?
Who did a majority of Tuoba Xianbei princesses marry?
What color is the star Beta?
What languages are the closest living relatives of English?
What can the meaning of the word "Hindi" be traced back to?
Is cancer a small-size constellation?
Which hemisphere is Cancer located on?
How man of Zetian's son had became Emperor?
Did Old English originate from a Germanic tribal and linguistic continuum along the Frisian North Sea coast?
Is the economy of Gujarat the largest in India?
The suras are placed in what order?
What language calls Charizard Lizardon?
Did the attempts of Gun to stop the flooding succeed?
Zhou ruled from walled cities, right?
What does Cancer's name mean in Latin?
How far is the double star known as Dabih from Earth?
Are there only 2 main airports in Rajasthan?
Did Karnataka contribute more than 10% to India's GDP?
Did Wen fight the Chen Dynasty in water?
Where is the Gliese 581?
Is Fiji Hindi the same as Modern Standard Hindi?
What does Magikarp evolve into?
Are the politics of Rajasthan only dominated by the Bharatiya Janata Party?
How many official languages are used in the United Nations?
How many prominent stars forming an asterism does Aries have?
What is the headquarters of the North Central Railway?
What percentage of Belarusians speak Russian fluently?
Is Urdu the most widely spoken language in the world?
Did Galileo first record the Cancer constellation?
The Bengal Presidency was established after which Battle in 1965?
What was the first religion practiced in the Punjabi region?
Who founded the Shang dynasty?
Why was Punjab important to Britain?
Do Venusaur's pre-evolutions have gender differences?
Who was killed with a blanket?
In the Northern Hemisphere, Gemini is prominent in which season?
Was the Reign of Ashoka before the Rise of the Sakas?
In which year was Western Liang destroyed?
Did the Five Barbarians establish dynastic states in southern China?
In which present day Indian state was the ancient city of Dholavira located?
Where did the empire that built the Lepakshi group of monuments originate?
How tall is Snorlax?
What are the most and the second-most spoken native languages in the world?
Which pokemon is widely considered to be the most popular and well-known pokemon species?
What does Lugalirra mean?
Is it true that Magikarp received mixed responses from critics?
Does Sagittarius contain three well-known star clouds?
Is Bengali the sixth-most spoken Indo-European language?
When did Chen Baxian kill Li Qianshi?
Venusaur is the final stage of what evolution tree?
How many English words are verbs?
Where is the largest population of native Spanish speakers?
For how many years was Namibia a colony of the German empire? 
How many times did Yu pass by his house when he was working to stop the floods?
Which Japanese graphic designer provided the design for Eevee and its initial evolution, Jolteon and Flareon
What is the modern name of the first Sui Dynasty capital?
Did Ash Ketchum win the Indigo League?
Did decreased availability of labour cause the production of rice to fall in Kerala in the 1970s?
Is Aries a large-sized constellation?
What is Hinduism largely shaped by?
Who started spices trade from Tangasseri in Quilon during 1502?
Did the Greeks always consider Libra to be scales?
What Indian classical dance is from the state of Uttar Pradesh?
Why did Huan Wen's northern expeditions fail?
What was a colony of the German Empire from 1884 to 1916?
Is Icarius killed by Dionysus
Where is the Grand Canal network centered at?
Does Madhya Pradesh rank 23rd on sustainable development goals?
Who helped Chen attack Lý Bôn?
When did Xiao Ying die?
What two words is Psyduck a combination of?
In English, do compound words have fewer stress units than their corresponding phrases?
Which Indian state grew out of the settlements along the five rivers?
Is French one of six offical languages used in United Nations?
In appearance and behavior, Snorlax is inspired by which veteran Pokémon game designer?
Is Jigglypuff like a balloon?
When did Qin Shi Huang die? 
Where was Helle in flight?
Is the design of Koduck praised by The Coventry Evening Telegraph 
What is Sibawayhi's book based on?
How tall is Snorlax?
Why did Chen release Du Sengming and Zhou?
Which month is the end of the winter for Uttar Pradesh's humid and subtropical climate?
Does Gujarat rank the 1st among Indian states and union territories in human development index?
What is the Bayer designation of the brighter star in Gemini?
What medical problem troubles Psyduck in the anime?
What is Aquarius identified as in the Babylonian star catalogues?
Did Shang never rebelled after Zhou Wu sent three of his brothers and an army?
Which Pokémon is able to break the bond between the two (Blaine and Mewto)?
Does Charmander evolve at level 15?
What is the three-letter abbreviation for the constellation?
What is some form of evidecne that there was contact with the Indo Europeans?
What is the official and national language of Indonesia? 
Which Spanish-speaking country in Hispanophone America has the most residents?
In which century did the Gupta empire begin to decline?
What US states is German most commonly spoken at home?
Who was the next emperor of Liang in 551 after Jianwen?
Was Republican government made Mandarin the official language of China?
What does Rajasthan mean?
Who described it as "the ultimate in terms of being the strongest Pokemon"?
Is Umbreon one of the first three Eeveelutions?
Hindi the official language of how many states?
In 2005, are most newspapers in West Bengal in Bengali?
How many days does it take the Moon to pass through the Gemini constellation?
Is the Silk Road formulated during the Tang dynasty?
What does Taurus's astronomical symbol resemble?
Is Urdu recognized by the Constitution of India?
Was Meghalaya's Governor Satya Pal Malik since September 2016?
What were the earliest forms of English collectively known as?
Did Atsuko Nishida design all the Eeveelutions?
Were other languages more popular than Indonesian when it was adopted as the national language?
Is West Bengal one of the ten most visited tourist destinations in India?
Which two regions in China continue their local Chinese as the primary medium of communication despite CCP's language policy?
How much higher was the 2014 per-capita income than the 2014 all-India average for the state having the Sevice sector accounting for 61.4 per cent of its value addition?
What does bahasa mean to Indonesians?
Does faintness make capricornus not so important?
What dynasty succeeded the Xia dynasty?
Is Arabic one of the six offical languages of United Nation?
Did Charmander made the cut and returned in Pokémon Sword and Shield before 2022?
What region was the site of the Indus Valley Civilization?
How many stars within the constellation's borders are brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6.5?
What grammatical pattern is closely related to the Indonesian spoken in Jakarta and its surrounding areas?
What Urdu dialect is distinct by its mixture of vocabulary from Marathi	 Konkani	 Arabic	 Persian	 and Chagatai that are not found in the standard dialect of Urdu? 
Where was the second capital of the Western Jin?
Which pokemon is a red, medium-sized fish?
Is Jhelum the largest tributary of the Indus?
In the 16th century, what was the first native name of Bengali? 
What was the imperial title of the sixth Mughal Emperor ruling with an iron fist over most of the Indian subcontinent?
Is the Sichuan dialect distinct from the standard language?
What surname did the Tuoba adobt as a part of systematic Sinicization?
What is the height of the Shillong Peak?
What is the thirteenth-largest state by area in India?
With what Pokémon's DNA sample was Mewtwo created in the anime?
What is Charmander’s second evolution?
At what age was Emperor Ming's nephew killed? 
Which part of Squitle's body enables this Pokémon to swim at high speeds?
What continent has the majority of the world's French-speaking population?
Is Karnataka home to India's second-largest arid region?
Does Portuguese have sub-dialects? 
Before joining Ash, who did Bulbasaur live with in the Pokemon anime?
Is German the most widely spoken Germanic Language?
Is German the only major language that capitalizes all nouns?
Was the city of Surat once considered one the most import ports in the world?
What is the difference, rounded to the closest integer, between the highest and lowest recorded temperature in degrees C?
What is the state game of Maharashtra?
Do most English dialects share the same 84 consonant phonemes?
Did Eevee appear in Detective Pikachu?
What were the first three evolutions of Eevee?
Who voiced Snorlax in the Japanese versions of the Pokémon anime and the Super Smash Bros. series of video games?
What type of Pokémon is Bulbasaur?
Who wanted to replace Dutch with Indonesian?
Can a Balbasaur eventually evolve into a Mega Venusaur?
Which language did the Spanish language evolve from?
What is the significance of Oracle Bones?
In which century was Roman Hispania conquered by the Germanic, Suebi and Visigoths?
What year did Bulbasaur debut as a starter Pokemon?
Is French descended primarily from Vulgar Latin?
Which god is associated with the constellation that acquired the title "Lord of the Head" in Egypt?
When did Yang Tong die?
How long did Wang Mang’s Xin dynasty last? 
Who published Pokemon?
Which conference ended with a complete standardization of the Standard High German language in its written form?
Did summar last from March to June in Andhra Pradesh?
Which is a planetary nebula that has a magnitude of 11 and appears very close to the NGC 6440?
Did psyduck appear as part of the main cast in Pokémon Detective?
Are most Pokémons born instead of getting hatched from eggs?
Who is the original female protagonist in the Pokémon Adventures
How many Pokémon were chosen as Japan's mascots in the 2014 FIFA World Cup?
Does West Bengal have less than 91 million inhabitants?
Is Hindi the national language of India?
Who formalized the division into Libra?
Was Emperor Gaozong the father of Taizong?
What is the name of the Sima Chuzhi's son
Is the total population of Madhya Pradesh under 50 million people?
Where is the Jin River?
Is Eevee a normal type Pokemon?
Does Hindi uses more Arabic and Persian loanwords compared to Urdu.
What languages do all insitutions of the EU use as a working language ?
How many clauses may an English sentence be composed of?
In what dynasty was the earliest securely dated event in Chinese history?
Who created Magikarp?
Was Petrus Plancius's introduction of Apes widely accepted?
Roman language is derived from which language?
How many light years is 54 Leonis away from Earth?
What has a small tuft of black hair at the top of its head?
At what level can Magikarp learn the Splash move?
Who voiced Mewtwo in Japanese in the film?
When did the British start governing Tamil Nadu?
What does the song that appears on Pokétoon Magikarp’s Journey feature?
Did the population of India increase or decrease from 2001 to 2011?
What term did Amir Khusrow use in his poetry?
Where is Urdu spoken chiefly?
Did Ibn Manzur first created Lisan al-Arab?
What culture "Plaited Barbarians" consider themselves true champions of?
What is the name of the only international airport at Rajasthan?
What is the official language of Taiwan?
How many times did the Shang move their capital according to the Records of the Grand Historian?
What family of languages is Russian part of?
What was the destination of the train that ran on 16 April 1853?
Is the governor the head of the government?
Is Capricornus one of the constellations of the zodiac?
Will the Sun be in Scorpius at the December solstice in 2250?
What is the largest Indian state by area and the seventh largest by population?
Did the Emperor Yang live a frugal life?
When did Hou forced Emperor Jianwen to abdicate?
Who was emperor when the silk road was established?
How many years did Zhou Dynasty last?
What is the weight of Snorlax?
Is Delta Cancri an orange-hued giant star?
Who created the world's first known raised-relief map from rice in the 1st century?
What is the 23rd largest Indian state by area?
Has English been written in a Latin alphabet since the seventh century?
In which year did Rajasthan witness the greatest percentage in women's literacy? 
What is Maharashtra's border on the west?
Is the Khasi language the only surviving Mon-Khmer language in India? 
It is estimated that how many people speak spanish as a native language? 
What date did the event allowing to catch Pikachu that had learned Surf, a normally incompatible move, end?
How many bird sanctuaries are there in Karnataka?
Is the sun in Scorpius only during December?
What is Charizard originally called in Japanese?
What does Jigglypuff do when it becomes angry?
How many official languages does the UN have?
Are there Russian speakers in Asia in 2010?
What did the UNICEF and WHO desginate Kerala as the world's first?
Who created Eevee?
How many fingers does Charmander have?
Is Pisces visible in major cities?
Is the identification of Leo's bright stars a modern discovery? 
What are the three circles of English speaking countries?
Who discovered the Crystal Ball Nebula?
What does Bulbasaur enjoy doing for the bulb on its back to grow?
What percent of India's sugar comes from Uttar Pradesh?
Is Nokrek Peak the highest point in Meghalaya?
Can Bulbasaur evolve into Ivysaur at any level?
What animated live-action film does Charizard appear in?
In the animated series, what do Ash Ketchum, Brock, and Misty encounter?
Who defeated Mahipala, the king of Bengal, and built Gangaikonda Cholapuram?
What is the official language of Rajasthan?
Is Punjab in the southern part of India?
Is Spanish one of the six official languages of the United Nation?
How many people are native speakers of Bengali?
Who first used the name Urdu?
Was Chu-Han contention before the Han dynasty?
Where was the first factory for the resource that Kerala supplies 60% of its global produce located?
What is the Snorlax caught by Red in Pokémon Adventures named?
What is the first Gujarati film that was released? 
Where is Sagittarius located?
Is Rajasthan's economy is primarily technological?
The Tang Empire was at its height of power up until the middle of which century?
Was the first battle of Tarain in 1091?
Khariboli belongs to which group of central Indoi-Aryan languages?
Who are the largest group of people in Meghalaya?
Does one of the top five most populous states in India border Bangladesh, Nepal, and Bhutan?
Did Shang astronomers observe comets?
How many evolutions of Eevee were introduced when the Eevee pokemon species was first introduced?
Was the Venusaur renamed to be more relatable to American children?
How many typings does Squirtle have?
Are free programs available that allow users to type Russian characters?
Were there more people who spoke English as a secondary language than those who spoke it as first language?
What does Pikachu serve as for Nintendo?
What pokemon was designed based on Charizard?
Was Gun the second earliest recorded member of the Xia clan?
Is Psyduck the only Pokemon on the livery of the first Pokemon Jet?
What does Capricornus mean in Latin
Is Snorlax ranked the 28th best Pokemon?
Which kingdoms were the first ones to use Kannada in administration evidenced by the Halmidi inscription?
In Pokémon Go, Charizard exists in how many forms?
In what months does the Beta Taurid meteor shower occur?
What is the Chinese name for Aries?
Is Portuguese the most spoken language in Latin America?
Why does Sagittarius contain many star clusters and nebulae?
Why did Hercules fight the Leo lion with his bare hands?
When did Xiao Bo declare a resistance against Chen from Guang Province?
What is the majority religion of the state home to the Amarkantak pilgrimage site?
What is the smallest constellation in the zodiac?
Is the father of Yu the Great the second recorded member of the Xia clan?
how many light-years is Deneb Algedi located from Earth?
Who was the first voice actor for Squirtle in the anime? 
What does Rajasthan literally mean?
What triggered the collapse of the Former Qin?
How far is the Lagoon Nebula from the earth?
who was the first to recognize that diabetic patients should avoid consuming starchy foods?
What are the two working languages of the European Court of Human Rights?
What is Sagittarius commonly represented as?
Is Tamil Nadu the most urbanised state in India?
Is the state whose capital is Bangalore originally known as the State of Mysore?
Is the first identified quasar in Virgo?
When did Lü Zhi issue a bronze coin that was much lighter in weight than previous coins? 
What is the official and national language of Indonesia
Does Portuguese has approximately 274 million total speakers?
How many different designs were conceived for the first generation of Pocket Monsters?
Which royal dynasty of China followed the Shang dynasty?
Does Meghalaya follow a patrilineal system of lineage and inheritance?
Can Magikarp learn the move Flail from generation 1?
Is Capricornus a bright constellation?
When did Bronze producting begin in the Shang Dynasty?
In what year did the Tuoba chief receive the title of the Prince of Dai?
Why is Magikarp usually overlooked by trainers?
IN Pokémon Red and Blue, is Magikarp seen commonly when fishing with an Old or Good Rod?
Who portrayed Pikachu in the live-action animated film Pokémon Detective Pikachu?
What is the job position of Ahsan Iqbal when saying "Now the government is working on a new curriculum to provide a new medium to the students which will be the combination of both Urdu and English and will name it Urdish."?
Who controlled Madhya Pradesh before the establishment of semi-autonomous states?
What is Meghalaya bound to to the south?
What is the difference between male and female Pikachus?
Who was the first to use scales and grids for maps? 
What Arabic word is the brightest star in Capricornus named for?
What was declared standard definition of German in 1901?
What companies own the Pokémon franchise? 
English is named after? 
What is Snorlax's number in the Pokedex?
What two constellations is Pisces between?
When is the sun in Scorpius?
Is Karnataka the largest Indian state by  population?
Who founded the Tang dynasty?
What is the second-fastest-growing European language, according to estimates by UNESCO?
Did Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Arietis form a part of the porpoise?
What kind of activities did the King appoint officials to manage?
Was annual rainfall a factor when dividing Maharashtra in to nine agro-climatic zones?
When was AndhraState merge with the Telugu-spearking areas of the Hyderabad State?
What is the brightest star in Gemini? 
Which languages use vowel quality to contrast stressed syllables with unstressed syllables?
How high can Charizard fly?
What is the capital of Meghalaya?
Is the Galactic Center in the Sagittarius?
Who was the creator of the Pok mon franchise?
Do most Mandarin varieties have five tones?
Who owns Jigglypuff in the Electric Tale of Pikachu manga
Is the Awadhi language the official language in Fiji?
What industries did the Han dynasty nationalize in 117 BC
How many consonants are in Bengali?
Was the Yellow River split into three new branches?
Out of the two largest princely states in Maharashtra, which one was annexed to the Bombay Presidency later?
In what year did the Old Portuguese period end?
What is the oldest recorded religion in the Punjab region?
Is Tamil Nadu the largest state in India?
What borders Andhra Pradesh to the south?
Where does secondary stress fall in Bengali?
Is Entei hatched from an egg?
When was confusion over whether Junagadh would join India or Pakistan resolved?
Who is the last Emperor of the Sui Dynasty?
Is French the third most taught foreign language in the EU?
When did the reign of Auranhzeb end?
Is the Three Departments and Six Ministries system the successor of the Five Departments and Six Board?
Who designed Charizard's evolutions?
What negative impact has the spread of English globally had on other languages?
What are jiedushi?
Who established the new powerful Chen dynasty?
What color is the star in Cancer with the longest name?
Where does constellation Capricornus lie in Chinese astronomy?
Do the original Portraits of Periodical Offering of Liang still exist today?
Is the Yin dynasty the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
What is the most indebted state in India?
How many constelations surround Gemini?
Where is Leo located?
Who originally practiced the “eastern Magadhi Prakrit”?
Who established the date of the earliest securely dated event in Chinese history?
Who lead the evolution ceremony of ceremony for Bulbasaur in Kanto in Bulbasaur's Mysterious Garden?
What language is the most taught foreign language and the most used language on internet websites?
What movie did Squirtle appear in the background of?
What animal was Venusaur designed to resemble?
What caused Northern Wei troops to withdraw eventually?
What is the third-most spoken native language in the world?
What did the Zeus get from the goat that made the cornucopia as a baby?
In which video game was the player to receive an Eevee from Professor Oak at the beginning of the game as the player's starter?
Was the founder of the Sui dynasty an Ethnic Han?
Who did Lord Vishnu punish for exiling the Devas?
Which five rivers are there in Punjab?
What did the Rajput kindoms gain from accepting British suzerainty in the 19th century?
In anime, who owned Charmander before Ash?
When was People's Republic of China founded?
Does Gujurat have a GDP of more than 250 Billion USD?
How many peroids did Han dynasty have
Did Squirtle appear in Super Smash Bros?
What is the biggest, most popular and widely celebrated festival in West Bengal?
Syfy refers to Psyduck as the key pokémon in the storyline of the film in 2019.
Who created Mewtwo?
Is Tamil a relatively new language?
What was the cause of the War of the Eight Princes?
What is the Praesepe cluster also called?
Who followed the lead of Liang’’s Emperor Wu and offered himself to Buddha’s service on one occasion?
Does Charmander become Brock's Pokémon?
Where do the majority of the Spanish speakers live today?
Was Tang dynasty after Sui dynasty?
In which state was India's first port established?
Most of the lexicon of Portuguese is derived from which language?
Which country starts to increasingly use simplified characters among younger generations?
Was Emperor Wen's campaign to destroy the Wei ultimately successful?
Is High German historically distinguished as Istvaeonic? 
Is Spanish the third most used language on internet websites?
In what year did a comprehensive academic study ranked Portuguese as one of the 10 most influential languages in the world?
Does 26 states use Arabic as an official language?
Which is the brightest star in the Aquarius constellation?
In what season is the Sun in the sign of Cancer?
What was Confucian philosopher Wang Tong's most famous work?
Is Antares in Scorpio?
How were reviews for Pikachu?
Who is Mew's descendant?
Is German the most spoken Germanic language?
What is the color of the brightest star in aquarius constellation?
Is Sheratan one of the bright stars of Aries?
How are non-finite words inflected?
What is the period of Delta Librae?
Is the capital of Rajasthan the largest city in the state?
How many letters are in the Spanish alphabet?
Who was the first ruler of the Sui Dynasty?
What is the second most popular religion in Madhya Pradesh?
Was gemini one of the 48 constellations described by the 3rd century AD astronomer Ptolemy?
How many international flights does Kolhapur Airport accommodate annually?
How many foreign tourists does the capital of Mahrashtra attract yearly?
Did all the Qing Province belong to Wei army when the Song emperor Wu died?
Was the Rebellion of the Three Guards successful?
What fraction of Rajasthan lies northwest of the Aravallis?
How is the lion in Leo standing?
Why is Leo especially prominent?
How many modern constellations are there?
Did the Han dynasty see an increase in agricultural slaves?
Does Kerala have more than 1,000 Indian elephants?
What caused causing general discontent from the soldiers and officials?
According to Greek mythology, which goddess asked Zeus to raise Orion into the sky?
Is it true that most of Indian Punjabis are Shia Muslims?
Is Zygarde capable of human speech?
Is Magikarp found on land?
What is the distribution of vegetation in northern West Bengal dictated by?
What is "fishes" in Latin?
When did the Jin Dynasty exist?
What type of words make up most academic texts?
Who promoted the political philosophy that the Zhou conquest of the Shang is the passing of the Mandate of Heaven?
Is the current Pikachu skinnier?
Who designed Squirtle?
What type of star underwent the type II-P supernova in the outer regions of M74, discovered by Robert Evans in June 2003?
When did An Lushan die?
How many erstwhile states do Rajasthan comprises?
Is Capricornus the smallest constellation in the zodiac
Which of Bulbasaur's body part collects energy from a natural source?
Are count nouns included in common nouns?
Where is Sagittarius most prominently visible?
Was the Malay language a significant trading and political language when the Dutch East India Company first arrived in the archipelago?
How much area does Andhra Pradesh cover?
What distinguishes Libra for the unaided observer?
What did Mikey defeating Team Rocket with his Eevee prove to his brothers?
When do the Northern Taurids and the Southern Taurids equalize?
How were chariots used in warfare during the Shang Dynasty?
In what region did Ash find out May's Squirtle evolved into Wartortle?
What happens when Jigglypuff tries to sing to other Pokemon?
Whose use is prohibited when battling other players because of its multiple strengths and few weaknesses?
What is the most populated city in Madhya Pradesh?
What insurrection caused the downfall and ruin of the Liang? 
Will Charizard torch weaker foe?
Is Uttar Pradesh governed by dictatorship?
Who established the Xia dynasty?
What fish is Magikarp based off of?
What is the largest city in Madhya Pradesh?
What was preceeded by the Southern Qi dynasty and succeeded by the Chen dynasty?
Who was the developer of the Pokemon series?
Which dynasty was after the Eastern Jin dynasty?
Which globular cluster is a loose cluster and is 50,000 light-years from Earth?
Is West Bengal an Indian state?
Who sent a scorpion to kill Orion after Orion boasted to the goddess Artemis and her mother, Leto?
Is Pisces visible from any major cities?
Which is a binary star in the Gemini constellation which is only divisible in the large amateur telescope?
Can Eevee evolve to suit their surroundings?
What generation of the Pocket Monsters games was Charmander designed for?
Who is the mother of Pollux?
Do more people speak Kannada than Tamil in Karnataka?
How many people speak Portuguese in Canada?
Historically	 Aries has been depicted as a crouched	 wingless ram with its head turned towards what?
In which area of North American is Russian more spoken than English?
What is the abbreviation for Modern Standard Arabic?
What is the Sinitic language known as?
Can Pikachu communicate by saying "blablabla"
Where is Barossa German spoken?
Who published the Pokemon series?
How many died in Tamil Nadu from the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami?
What did Ea rule?
What the High German varieties spoken by the Ashkenazi Jews?
Why didn't the qiaoren pay tax?
What is the population of Meghalaya as of 2014?
Is the origin of the name Bengal known?
Was Gujarat one of the main central areas of the Indus Valley Civilization?
Who designed Pikachu?
Did Princess Pingyang rose in rebllion in 617?
Who described the character as a "cult favorite" amongst fans
When did Pikachu first appear?
Can Magikarp learn the move Flail at level 25 in the first generation of Pokémon games?
Is Leo Ring made up of a cloud of hydrogen, helium gas?
According to the 2011 national census, does the third-most-populous state in India comprise more than 7.55% of India's population?
Where did Damian abandon his Charmander?
Who got control of the Punjab region after the Sikh Empire?
How many Indian sister states are there?
Which god was associated with Aries?
Does Aquarius contain any deep sky objects that are in the Messier catalog?
What is Psyduck known as in Japan?
What constellation does the star Spica belong to?
What Persian word that meant “to create a mixture” was used to describe Urdu? 
In which year did the Jallianwala massacre take place?
What does the name "Yu-lin" mean?
How many people speak Portuguese in former Portuguese India?
Is Algieba less than 260 light-years away from Earth?
From which language are all Romance languages descended?
Have the boundaries of the Punjab region changed many times throughout history?
Does Old Norse has any impact on English?
Who is widely considered to be the father of Indian cinema?
Is Beta Cancri the brightest star in Cancer?
How did Icarius of Athens die?
Is the center of the Milky Way in Sagittarius?
When did spoke-wheeled chariots appear in China?
How many districts are in Maharashtra?
Is Goguryeo the only kingdom of Korea in Sui dynasty?
Does modern Rajasthan includes most of Dubai?
Is German the most widely spoken Germanic language?
What is the alternative name for the Liang dynasty?
What is the third most spoken language in Europe? 
Is there evidence of trade between Gujarat and the United States going back 3000 years?
What did Southern Chinese writers call the Northern Wei?
What is the fastest known nova	 with a period of about 10 years? 
What is the brightest star in Libra? 
Is Meghalaya the wettest place on Earth?
How many Shang kings can have the same prefix used in their name?
What was Astraea holding in an Ancient Greek constellation?
Is Snorlax currently the heaviest Pokemon?
How many stars are there in Virgo?
Who generally ruled Han society?
Are Charmander found in Kanto?
Are there visible differences between Charizard's Mega Evolved forms?
How does one easily locate Gemini?
Why did Xiao Yi allied with Western Wei?
Did Xiao Yi kill Xiao Dong and Xiao Dong's younger brothers himself?
Who founded the Chen dynasty?
At the time of Indian independence, did present day Meghalaya constitute five districts of Assam? 
How did Chen secure prosperity and dominance?
Did the capital of the Sui dynasty ever change?
What does Magikarp evolve into?
Which dynasty did the Chen dynasty succeed?
How many bones were found in the initial scientific excavations in the 1920s and 1930s?
Did the bright stars of Cassiopeia form a part of the porpoise?
Is Aries one of the largest constellations?
Did United Provinces develop better after India's independence?
Is δ Sco the brightest star in Scorpius?
Was Aries fully accepted as a constellation before classical times? 
Is English the most used language on the Internet?
Was the Qin dynasty founded after 618?
Did Ardha Magadhi evolve from Magadhi Prakrit?
Were ducks among the Domesticated animals that were eaten during Han?
Is the city with the greatest number of Portuguese language speakers located in Portugal? 
When was the Second Battle of Tarain?
Which galaxy has the most massive black hole within the immediate vicinity of the Milky Way?
Which did Liu Yu became emperor?
What Pokemon did Magikarp knock out in Ya See We Want an Evolution?
Who was first to voice the original Mewtwo character in Japanese? 
In what year was the Duden Handbook declared as the standard definition of High German?
Who was the first to voice the original Mewtwo character in Japanese?
Who established the Han Dynasty?
Is Urdu the most widely spoken language in Uttar Pradesh?
Did the banks of the nile flood in anciet egypt?
What is Sagittaruis commonly represented as?
How many vowels does Russian have in stressed syllables?
Does West Bengal have less than 85 million inhabitants?
Is Bengali Gujarat's official language?
Does every Indonesian word contain an infix?
Was the first private radio station in India taken over by AIR?
The Liu Song dynasty preceded which dynasty?
What may be the parent body of one of the strongest meteor showers that occur during the day in Aries?
What type of Pok mon did Fujiwara want to create?
In which year did the Jin dynasty end?
Was Aries recognized as an official constellation 200 years ago?
In the Chinese mythological tale of the carps leaping over the Dragon Gate, what are the carps transformed into?
Does Psyduck play a main role in Pokémon Detective Pikachu?
Did Katsuyuki Konishi voice Snorlax in Pikachu & Pichu?
When was the period of Islamic conquests in the Indian subcontinent?
What is first year of Liu Yu's reign?
When did Western Wei army sacked Jiangling, forcing Emperor Yuan to surrender, and killed Emperor Yuan?
Is Aries between Pisces to the west and Taurus to the east?
What is the name of the river Sindhu?
What is the name of Emperor Xiaowu of Liu Song dynasty?
Why Urdu speakers in India have adopted Devanagari?
Does more than a quarter of Canada have French as their first language?
On how many continents is Portuguese spoken officially? 
Does Psyduck have wings?
What kind of animals can be probably seen in the Ranthambore National Park located in Sawai Madhopur?
Was a woman entrusted with Empress Wu's personal office?
Are there Russian speakers in Alaska?
Who defeated Northern Qi in 553?
What state has the second largest coastline in India?
Where is the Sui dynasty capital since 605?
What is the season after the monsoon season?
What acted as a barrier for Arab invaders from the 8th to the 11th century?
What is the father of Li Shimin known as?
How many national tiger reserves is Rajasthan home to?
Is the official language in Andhra Pradesh Telugu?
Who designed all the Eeveelutions except for Jolteon and Flareon?
Are Urdu and Hindi mutually intelligible during colloquial communication?
How many living East Slavic languages are there?
What is desert in Gujarati?
How many primary tenses does English have?
What is the capital of Tang dynasty?
What does the Portuguese acronym CPLP stand for?
Was Chattisgarh region a part of Madhya Pradesh a few years back?
Did Pan saved himself from the monster Typhon?
Was Jolteon designed by Atsuko Nishida?
In which other constellation of the zodiac does Libra lie in between?
What was Aquarius associated with in Ancient Egypt astronomy?
Who inherits all the wealth in Meghalaya? 
Is English the second most-spoken language in the world?
Can someone from France use the Thar Express?
What did Reliance Industries discover off the Andhra Pradesh coast?
When did Wang Tong die?
How many years in total did it take to stop the Yellow River flood?
Who succeeded Taizong?
Did officials receive salaries before Empress Dowager Feng took power?
When did some Shang family members change their name?
Where is verb–object–subject order used?
Is Kohlapur in the Deccan States Agency?
Who was Mewtwo cloned from?
Was Taoism repressed in the Jin dynasty?
Are there 35 verified exoplanets orbiting 29 stars in Virgo?
Was the Rebellion of the Three Guards longer than two years?
Is it true that a majority of Indian Punjabis are Sikh?
How much extra poll tax does merchants need to pay compared to adult men?
In the 2019 film Pokémon  Detective Pikachu, who voiced detective Pikachu?
Is the politics of Rajasthan dominated by the American Congress?
Is Andhra Pradesh in the south-eastern coatal region of India? 
Is it true that Spanish has smaller degrees of difference from Latin than Sardinian and Italian?
Who began the Hereditary System?
What tribes lived in the Ostsiedlung during the Old High German period?
What does Rajasthan literally mean?
What style of dance was Mahabrinda Natyam performed in?
What was Eevee called in the original Japanese games?
Were any museums similar to the Museum of Portuguese Language founded earlier?
Did Xiao Yi return to JianKang?
What was the term Hind Iranian Persian?
Is English largely learned as a second language?
Is Kolkata the largest metropolis in India?
Where does Sagittarius pass directly overhead?
Why does the sun take longer to pass through Virgo than any other zodiac?
Who usurped the Jin dynasty throne in 403?
Is Portuguese the second fastest growing language?
Where is Urdu chiefly spoken?
Did Howard Clifford once own an Eevee?
Which city was the last Shang capital?
Who originally voiced Snorlax in English?
What proportion of India's industry is in Maharashta?
Is Libra located in the Northern hemisphere?
Who referred to Sima Rui's empire as "Langya"?
What World Heritage Site makes Uttar Pradesh a favoured tourist destination in India?
Which type of encoding was and is still widely used in UNIX-like operating systems?
Is Snorlax said to weigh over 2,000 pounds?
Where was the earliest attestation of Old Arabic thought to be?
Was the Islam Shah Suri after Mughal rule?
Does the Gigantamax form change all venusaur's Grass-type damaging moves?
When was Liu Xiu crowned as Emperor Guangwu of Han?
Is the states with the third-largest economy in India dominated by the services undustry?
Did Mewtwo win the IGN reader's best pocket monster vote?
How many claws does Psyduck's arms have?
What is the first sentence of the provided article?
Is Aries one of the 49 constellations described by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy?
Which article of the Constitution of Bangladesh states Bengali to be the sole official language of Bangladesh?
Which ruler expanded the territories of Marwar up to Sindh-Cholistan?
In the Japanese versions of the Pokémon anime and the Super Smash Bros. series of video games, who is Snorlax voiced by?
What is Jigglypuff known for?
Is Kerala a major spice exporter since 3000 BCE?
When was the Silk Road reopened during the Tang dynasty?
Why are there so many ethnic groups that make up the Punjab?
What is the nickname of Squirtle in Pokémon Adventures?
Is Bulbasaur known as the Seed Pokémon?
Does Karnataka contribute more than half of India's national GDP?
Who is constantly stunned by its headache?
Is Scorpius the largest constellation in the southern hemisphere?
What evolution of Bulbasaur has a large flower on its back?
Are there Spanish-speakers in Asia?
Is Telugu te most spoken language in the world?
Who was the successor to the emperor Ming?
When did India gain independence ?
Who created Charmander?
Did Shun appointed Yu to finish his father's work?
What year did Bengali become an official UN language?
Who created the Pokémon named Mewtwo?
Who married Liu Jingyan?
What was the earliest observation of a conjunction and occultation between constellations and planets?
Could the Zhou's fengjian system be compared with the medieval rule in Europe?
What is the official language of Bangladesh
Does Karnataka experience autumn?
Which moves can Magikarp learn by levelling up in the first generation of Pokemon games?
Students of what studies were candidates for the imperial examinations?
Who was Emperor Wu's brother?
When did Emperor Guangwu's forces defeat the Red Eyebrows?
If Chinese is not divided into variants, what is the most spoken language in the world?
Which state has the largest road network in India?
How many native Portuguese speakers are there?
What are the earliest forms of English called?
Why did Lie Jun overthrow his brother, Liu Shao?
Is Russian an official language in Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan?
Did Pikachu appear in Black and White having to trade?
Did the chariot play a major role in the war after the Shang Dynasty was introduced to China from Central Asia?
Was Anglo-Saxon developed from a set of West Germanic dialects?
Why won't Pioneer 10 hit Taurus eventually?
The Sun takes how many days to pass through Virgo?
What is the first year that UNESCO commemorated Internation Mother Language Day?
Did Northern dialects always view Southern dialects as equal?
What was bronze normally used for?
Who is Blue's grandfather?
What star represents the left shoulder of the water bearer in Aquarius?
What is the historiographical name for the Chen Dynasty?
Which year did Confucian philosopher Wang Tong die?
Is the second dimmest one of the zodiacal constellations located in the Northern celestial hemisphere?
What was the lasting legacy of the Sui dynasty?
The brightest stars in Libra form what shape that distinguishes it for the unaided observer? 
Who eliminated separatist forces within the empire and reformed the former Liang’s policies? 
Where can Eevee survive?
What trait does Zeus discourage by raising Orian and the scorpion to the sky?
Which city has a greater population, Chennai or Madurai?
What countries is Mandarin the official spoken language of?
Where did Eevee first appear?
What was the name of Emperor Chen Xu's wfie?
IS Nova Sagittarii 2015 No. 3 was discovered on 15 March 2015?
Who wants to kill Phrixos and Helle?
What is the second largest Indian state by area?
What is the relation between Castor and Pollux in Greek mythology?
When did Xin dynasty last?
Does the killing brother fact makes Taizong a weak leader?
Who evolves Eevee into Umbreon?
How far from the Earth is the Alpha Aquarii located?
Was Gujarat one of the original 12 subahs?
How many wildlife sanctuaries does Karnataka have
Who portrayed the junior unpaid reporter in Pokemon Detective Pikachu?
What do female venusaurs have in the center of its flower which the male ones lack?
How many areas did the strong army supported by the early Western Zhou campaigned in?
When does Sagittarius rise at midnight?
Are Kota City Ajmer connected by rail?
What is the Chinese name for the Yellow River
What is the earliest recorded religion in Punjab?
Which twitter account has been made that overlay hit songs for a clip of Jigglypuff performance?
Was was proposed to be called the High German?
Who enthroned in Jiankang and became the Emperor Wu of Liang dynasty?
Does Madhya Pradesh have the smallest reserves of diamond and copper in India?
What make the tip of the scorpion's curved tail?
In which year did Xiao Daocheng became the emperor of the new Southern Qi dynasty?
How many commanderies did Emperor Wen lose to Wei?
In the animated series, what was the gang of five Squirtle that Ash Ketchum, Brock, and Misty encountered called?
Where is the largest cluster of photovoltaic power plants in the world located?
What was the Spanish lexicon was most influenced by?
How long did the coinage issued by the central government mint in 119 BC remain the standard coinage of China?
Did Charizard replace Unfezant?
Was Pikachu ranked person of the year in 1999
How many verified exoplanets are there in Virgo?
Who voiced Mewtwo in Pokémon Puzzle League? 
Does Gujarat have the lowest sex ratio among the 29 states in India?
Can Snorlax digest moldy food?
Did religion play a role in Tang politics?
Where did the surviving members of the Jin imperial family flee to?
When did British occupy the Philippines?
How many stars of naked eye visibility does the gemini constellation include?
Who introduced Han Chinese penal codes in the Northern Wei state?
What do Bengali women commonly wear?
When did the Mughals come to power?
Are there tigers in Tamil Nadu?
Did Subhas Chandra Bose fight against the British?
What was alternatively known as Southern Liang in historiography?
Is Hindi among the first three official court language adopted in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi?
Who is the main antagonist in Pokémon: The First Movie?
What is Pikachu's evolutionary predecessor or pre-evolution?
Where is the Cancer constellation located?
If Charmander evolves twice, what is it called?
Is Pikachu Ash Ketchum's first Pokemon?
Was Lady Hou a poet in the Sui dynasty?
What was recorded as originating from Persia by the Book of Liang?
Does Jigglypuff have a pre-evolution?
What are the two geographic features of Rajasthan?
Who is the original female protagonist in the Pokémon Adventures?
What is the largest city of Gujarat?
Who is the heaviest known Pokémon ever discovered?
What are some of the religious traditions of Punjabi Muslims and Hindus?
What is the pre-evolution of Snorlax?
What language is more popular than English in Canada?
How many countries are a member of The Community of Portuguese Language Countries?
Is the Siju Wildlife Sanctuary located in Meghalaya?
Was Wang's regime destablized by massive floods?
How much has Snorlax been said to weigh?
Is Hindi the only one language of the Republic of India?
Which state has the highest literacy rate in India?
Is Aries one of the constellations of the zodiac?
How many victories had King Li achieve?
Which other Pokemon is Squirtle associated with in the Super Smash Bros. games?
Which of the works written in Old High German in the ninth century is focused on by scholars?
What generation was Sylveon released as an Eeveelution?
Is Saggitarius located between Scorpious and Ophiuchus?
Is Pisces a constellation of the zodiac?
Who discovered Neptune?
Does Durga Puja last more than 10 days?
Who assassinated Emperor Wen?
Who is Snorlax voiced by in the Japanese versions of the Pokémon anime and the Super Smash Bros?
In what video game did Venusaur first appear?
What is the most spoken language in the world?
What was the Song dynasty?
Who is Emperors Wen's successor?
What Tang dynasty economic system allowed the poor to afford land?
Did the Vedic religion influence Hinduism?
Who wrote the state anthem for Karnataka?
Is Udupi Sri Krishna Matha a place of religious importance?
In which state are inhabitants called Awadhi?
In what year was the Deutsche Bühnensprache established?
Does Charmander have dual typing?
What is the Japanese word for seed?
The overlapping of which two meteor showers makes the Epsilon Geminids difficult to detect visually?
What color is Squirtle's skin?
Why was Chen Baxian named the the Viscount of Xin'an?
What year has the billingual Bombay State existed since?
What is the nickname for the Kerala state used by locals due to the abundance of coconut trees?
How do most Pokémon communicate in anime?
Who founded the Jin dynasty?
What animal is Squirtle based off of?
Which game where Psyduck was available as a partner was released only in Japan?
Did the abandonment of the equal-field system benefit poor citizens?
What is the most populous city in Kerala?
Is Korean one of the three Asian target languages in Australia? 
How many major groups of dialects about Mandarin in total have been recognized?
Do experts agree on the year of the fall of the Shang dynasty?
Who standardized Arabic grammar?
Where is Libra, the constellation of the zodiac, located?
Is more than half of the state forested?
In what year did the people of Giao Châu Province (Chen northern Vietnam) rebel under Lý Bôn?
What was Mingyuan's plan to invade Song?
Is the constellation with the brightest star named Spica the largest constellation in the sky?
Who killed An Lushan?
Was China proper united during the Three Kingdoms era?
How much land (mu) was assigned to adult females?
What was originally a Persian word that meant "to create a mixture"?
Could the emperor be a child in the Han dynasty?
Who wanted to create a blank slate Pokémon?
Is the airport in Kota open for commercial flights?
Did Tuoba Gui defeated the Rouran tribes and killed their chief, Heduohan, forcing the Rouran to flee west in 391?
who founded jin dynasty?
Is Andhra Pradesh's second official language Urdu?
Is the Tang dynasty also called the Tang Empire
How many star systems in Libra are known to have planets?
Squirtle is compose of which two words?
Who did Liu Jingyan marry?
The War of the Eight Princes weakended the Jin Dynasty.
Was the reforms of Xin dynasty welcomed by the old bureaucracy?
Is Virgo one of the constellations of the zodiac?
Is Hydra the largest constellation in the sky?
Is West Benegal the fourth-most populous state?
What was the other name given to the Shang dynasty?
Where is the economic hub during the Tang dynasty?
In which script is Punjabi written in India?
Was German the language of the Habsburg Empire?
Which court used the High Malay as the official language?
What is the second largest Indian state by area?
Whose method for connecting Capricornus' star was most influental?
Did Mandarin speakers live around southeast cost engaged a lot in overseas emigration before late 20th century?
Who is the last King of Shang
Around how many people regularly make use of Indonesian? 
Is there a black hole ejecting jets of matter 20 ly from the center of NGC 4261?
Who was the consort of Emperor Ku?
Does Tamil Nadu share an international maritime border with Sri Lanka?
Who formed the majority of the Han tax base?
What color is Antares' hue?
Is Virgo rich in constellations?
In what movie does Ash's Charmander evolve into Charizard?
Is Pikachu the only Pokemon that has the ability to learn new attacks such as the Electric-type attack in Pokemon video games?
Do syllables have to have a coda?
What is the maximum magnitude of the primary star of Gem (Propus)?
How many states in India prohibit the sale of alcohol?
Is Mandarin taught more often than other Chinese languages?
Is the Cat's Paw Nebula an emission nebula?
Who was Sima Chuzhi's son?
What outclassed Mega Charizard X?
Are the differences between Standard Chinese Mandarin and Standard Taiwanese Mandarin negligible?
Is air transport in India good?
Was Taoism monotheistic?
How long did the Zhou dynasty last?
What was the capital of the Jin dynasty when Emperor Min was executed?
Is Christianity present in Pakistani Punjab?
Does German have a nueter gender?
When did the Han government nationalize the private salt and iron industries? 
Is the state whose capital is Bangalore in southwest India?
What is the preceding dynasty of Tang dynasty?
Is the percent of forested area in Karnataka higher than the all-India average?
Has Portuguese provided loanwords to a language spoken in Iran?
What is capital of Madhya Pradesh?
Is IAST a system of writing Hindi in the Latin script?
Who is the fan wiki Bulbapedia named after?
Does Taiwan teach Indonesian in school?
In ancient Egypt	 the three brightest stars of Libra formed a constellation that was viewed as a what? 
What does the shape of the dorsal fin resemble?
In generation 2 to 8, at what level can Magikarp learn the Flail move?
Does majority of the people in Karnataka speak Kannada?
The Ming dynasty administration used what language?
Was the Xia dynasty the second dynasty in traditional Chinese historiography?
In which language is Aries called Taleh?
Who founded Gija Joseon?
Which voice actor has voiced both James and Charmeleon in the Pokemon anime?
Has Bulbasaur been used in promotional merchandising for Burger King?
Which Empire made English the first truly global language by the late 18th century?
How many more evolutions have been introduced in Pok mon games?
Was Sima Yan the eldest son of Sima Zhao?
What is the name of the second longest river in Gujarat?
Who replaced Chen Shujian as governer of Jiang Province?
Was Pikachu the mascot for the Pokémon comic series or the anime series?
How old was Liu Zixun when he died?
What endonym is Bengali gernerally known by?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the sky?
What number is Bulbasaur in the Pokedex?
Which dynasty first ruled Maharashtra?
Did Hou Jing die after he was defeated?
Many Shang clans that migrated northeast were integrated into Yan culture after Western Zhou's collapse.  
What district was created on 22 February 1972?
Is the location of Pisces between Aquarius and Aries?
What dialect is Standard Mandarin Chinese based on?
Does the German consonant system has much more number of consonants in comparison with other languages?
Scorpius's bright stars are mostly in which OB association?
In what century did English start to form?
Which Indian state include the Basavana Bagewadi?
Is the most populated state in India located in southern India?
In Bengali, are nouns and pronouns inflected for case?
Does the Xin dynasty split the reign of the Han dynasty? 
What city has the greatest number of Portuguese language speakers in the world?
Is French the only official language in Haiti
In what month did Aristotle likely observe Jupiter in conjunction with and then occulting a star in Gemini?
Was Medieval Hindi literature primarily written in Delhavi? 
Did Squirtle evolve in the anime?
When did Emporer Wu die?
What is Cancer bordered by to the West?
Spanish is the official language of how many countries?
Who founded the Liu Song?
What is the third largest religion in Gujurat?
Is 1000 pounds and average weight for a pokemon?
Does the objects often occur in the reverse order in southern dialects?
Is Rajasthan well-connected to the main cities of the country?
Who wrote Yushu Houting Hua and Linchun Yue?
As of 2002, does the Sun appear in the constellation Libra on November 25?
Is Snorlax entirely teal in color?
What state was Meghalaya previously part of?
What is the only way Pikachu communicates?
In which present day Indian state was the ancient city of Gola Dhoro located?
Who ruled Girinagar from 322 BCE to 294 BCE?
Why Northern Qi gave up their support of Xiao Guan?
What is the Japanese name of Squirtle?
How is English described in terms of rhythm?
Which part made Virgo become associated with fertility in the Babylonian MUL.APIN?
In which year did the Zhou court recognize Han, Zhao, Wei as fully independent states?
Which food is famous in Rajasthan because they  prefer foods that last for several days and can be  eaten without heating?
What is the national language of Indonesia?
Which was the longest dynastic regime in Chinese history?
Which Portugese explorer described Surat in 1514?
Where did the Vellore mutiny against the British East India Company take place?
What type is Venusaur?
Is West Bengal one of the five most visited tourist destinations in India?
Who is Charizard the evolved form of?
When did the Sui dynasty absorb the Chen dynasty?
In what episode of the Pokémon anime was a Magikarp able to battle very well, even knocking out Pikachu? 
Was Liang the second of the four Southern dynasties during the Northern and Southern dynasties period?
In what season of the year 555 did Xia Yuanming arrive at Jiankang to take the throne?
How many constellations were described by Ptolemy?
What constelation lies between Scorpius and Ophiuchus to the west and Capricornus and Microscopium to the east?
When did the British East India Company gained Mumbai?
Is Virgo prominent in the spring sky in the northern hemisphere?
Does Karnataka have equally percent of male and female?
Who is Squirtle voiced by in Japanese?
How was Old Malay primarily spread?
Which pokemon is known as the Fish Pokémon?
What helped Liu Yu against western Shu?
Is NGC 2158 or NGC 2392 further from Earth?
Was Emperor Yang still alive when Goguryeo was ended?
Does the constellation Apes represent a cow?
What's the reward for defeating Red in Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver?
Is Proto-Germanic the common ancestor of Dutch and German?
Which actor voiced James in the original Japanese version of the Pokémon anime?
What prefix is contained in the German verb "mitgehen"?
What cause the difference of Malaysian Malay and Indonesian?
What was the first native name for Bengali?
Did the Pokemon Trading Card Game exist in 1990? 
What generation did Pikachu first appear in?
Do Muslims form the largest minority in Meghalaya?
What is the native language of Taiwan?
How many districts are Kerala's 27 revenue subdivisions and 77 taluks organized into?
The first reign of the Sui dynasty supported which school of Taoism?
In which series Eevee evolves into Sylveon?
What is Psyduck known at in Japan?
Where does the Moon appear in a single night?
The majority of the population in Meghalaya, including the Khasi, Jaintia, and Garo tribal groups, follow what kind of inheritance system?
Which organization has branches in 45 countries and one of the goals is to promote education universally?
Is the Capricornus constellation bordered by Saggitarius?
Which ancient civilizations made up what is now Rajasthan?
In what museum can you see the skeleton of a whale?
Do different dialects of Spanish have different consonant phonemes?
Modern Danish is in what branch of Germanic languages?
Did Pikachu's current design lose weight from its original? 
Which constellation is visble to observers south of  latitude 60°N?
What Persian sport did women play?
Is Sui Dynasty poetry important?
What is the language of the Quran?
The majority of the world's French-speaking population lives on which continent? 
Did Emperor Xuan of Northern Zhou launch an attack on Chen, commanded in 579?
Who redesignated Gamma Scorpii as Sigma Librae?
How many people are native Spanish speakers?
Does Capricornus have many star above magnitude 3?
After which battle was the Shang dynasty founded in the Annals of the Yin?
Does Pisces originate from a composition of the Babylonian constellations Šinunutu4 and Anunitum?
Was wheat among the most common staple crops consumed during Han?
Does the Zodiac have thirteen constellations?
Are most of the total epigraphical inscriptions found by the ASI in India from Tamil Nadu?
What political doctrine was introduced during the Zhou dynasty?
What group since 1947 have historically formed the majority population in the city of Karachi? 
Who was Sima Zhao's father?
Is Russian used by a small number of people in Afghanistan?
What does Ivysaur evolve from? 
Is Charmander one of three 'starter' Pokémon that can be selected at the beginning of Pokémon Red and Blue, and their remakes, Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen?
How many homophones in Standard Chinese does 翼 have?
Would Indonesian and local languages affect each other?
Who are the two other starter Pokémon alongside Bulbasaur?
What is the brightest star in Gemini?
Who is another popular yellow mascot at the time?
What is meaning of the name of Aries in Latin?
Who is credited with standardizing Arabic grammar?
Which empire defeated the Muslim Mughals in the 17th century?
Does Gujarat encompass more number of Indus Valley Civilzation sites than any other state?
At what level does Charmander evolve into Charmeleon?
What is the founding myth of the Shang dynasty?
What was the first classic work  about the Tang?
Who listed Magikarp as 61st of their favorite Pokemon?
Why Jigglypuff's singing proves to be problematic for the protagonists?
In what year was the Tuoba chief granted the title of Prince of Dai?
Is the main component of Beta Cancri an orange giant?
What is the capital of the reunified empire under Han known as today?
Which period of English was many irregularities in spelling explained?
When will the Sun move into Aries?
is Sībawayhi's al-Kitāb the name of the first comprehensive description of the Arabic language?
What was the name of the state founded by a disgruntled Shang prince named Jizi?
Which galaxy in the Virgo cluster is spiral?
Do many Pokemon have a unique Z-move?
What language belongs to the Western Hindi group of the Central Indo-Aryan languages?
Is Charizard's design is inspired by ground-bound lizard like creatures?
Is Karnataka the third most popular destination for tourism among the states of India?
When did the Tang dynasty rule?
In what game is Charmander a starter?
Which constellation contains HD 12661?
How many doctors does Meghalaya have?
Does Karnataka have the smallest economy in India?
Is Praesepe located about 590 light-years from Earth?
Is French descended primarily from Vulgar Latin?
What is the closest relative of Portuguese? 
During which time did Jing dynasty exist?
Does Russian language belong to the Indo-European language family?
Is the Earth bigger then the planets that orbits HIP 14810?
Did Emperor Ming treat the people well?
The Shang dynasty preceded which dynasty?
Was the Standard Mandarin only based on the Beijing dialect?
What is the magnitude of the brightest star in Aquarius?
What empire were Banat, Bukovina, and Transylvania provinces of? 
Which dynasty laid the foundation for future dynasties?
How large is the Taurus-Auriga complex?
How far away is NGC 5897?
What α Capricorni includes?
What is a Portuguese-speaking person or nation is referred to as?
Is the Tang capital located in Beijing?
Is the Godavari river navegable?
What do the meteor showers in Aquarius named the "Eta Aquariids, the Delta Aquariids, and the Iota Aquariids" have in common?
Are most states of India passionate about football?
What stars eject gas from their equator?
What dynasty was the fourth and last of the Southern dynasties during the Northern and Southern dynasties period?
Was the Punjab region one of the earliest areas to be become urbanized?
Who published the Pokémon series?
Is Gujarat the largest state in India by area?
What are the only musical instruments dated to the Xia dynasty?
Is there a one-to-one correspondence between the sounds (phonemes) and the letters (graphemes) in most Bengali scripts?
What is code-switching?
Does Charmander ever return to Damian?
Is the Xia dynasty the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
In which film does Howard Clifford appear?
What does Charles Ferguson’s koine theory claim?
The contribution of Mahayana was concentrated in what topics?
How man years does Sui dynasty last?
Who established granaries as sources of food?
Are summer temperature fluctuations relatively peaceful in Uttar Pradesh?
What is the fastest growing langauge in Africa?
Did the dialect spoken in the Nadia region influence Bengali?
Is Maharashtra the largest state in India?
What is Charizard known as in Japan?
Where is the Nova Sagittarii 2015 No. 2 located within Sagittarius?
What are the five grains?
Did Neelam Sanjiva Reddy become the President of India before or after the unification with Telangana?
Could the Chen dynasty withstand an assault of 518,000 troops along the northern bank of the Yangtze River?
What Pokemon does Magikarp fight in Detective Pikachu?
Can Magikarp learn Hydropump and Bounce moves by simply leveling up?
Has Persian influenced the Indonesian language?
What does the name 'Aquarius' mean in Latin?
What happens if Blaine and Mewto separate for a long period of time before Entei breaks the bond?
Where did Ash Ketchum acquire his Pikachu in the Pokemon anime?
What name is Latin for ram?
Is Virgo the largest constealltion in the sky?
Is Hindi spoken as a first language in Nepal?
What term for Spanish did the Royal Spanish Academy use in 1800?
Did Sima Yan Kill Cao Huan?
What portion of the Indian Punjab workforce is farmers?
What does mega evolution give Charizard?
Was the language studied from Yinxu graves showed similarity to southern Han Chinese?
What was a criticism of Magikarp?
Who rescued Aphrodite and Eros?
How big was the force maintained by the Shang king?
Was Emperor Wen's boat outfitted with 50-foot-long booms?
What is Libra known as in Babylonian astronomy?
Which country is Rajasthan located?
Who wrote Jigglypuff's Magic Lullaby?
Did the old bureaucracy and nobility openly oppose the establishment of the Xin regime?
Who created Charizard?
Who provided the designs for Jolteon and Flareon?
What is the percentage of people who are Urdu speakers in India?
Is German the most spoken language in terms of native and second language in the United States?
Is West Bengal the most populous state in India?
Does the Standard Chinese have 2000 distinct syllables?
Is it true that Scorpius contains only one deep-sky object?
What character appears on All Nippon Airways's Pocket Monsters Boeing 747 jumbo jet other than Mewtwo?
Is French the second most widely spoken mother tongue in the European Union?
Does Squirtle's shell have uses other than protection?
Is Sparky from the Pokemon anime a Pikachu?
Did Jigglypuff get good reactions from the public from the beginning?
Who founded an early literary tradition of Hindavi in the late 13 century?
Is Maharashtra a state in the eastern peninsular region of India?
Who wrote an influential and perceptive study of this literary tradition?
Did Game Informer name Squirtle as its #01 Pokemon?
Are Gyarados generally friendly Pokémon?
As of the 2011 census, were there more men or women in Karnataka?
What were commonly eaten fruits and vegetables during Han?
What does Aries mean in Latin?
How many people live in the Canary Islands?
What does Munchlax evolve into?
Did Emperor Yang lose the support of the nomads after his father's death?
Who governs each district?
How many brothers did Zhou Wu send to ensure Wu Geng would not rebel?
With what can Charmander mega evolve?
How many speakers of Mandarin could understand the standard language in 1984?
In which video game does pre-evolution of Jigglypuff is introduced?
Who was granted the title King of Jin because of conquering Shu Han and capturing Liu Shan
What is the name of the coastal area in West Bengal?
Are classes officially taught in Malaysian in Indonesia?
Did Yu use the same method as his father to stop flooding?
Where was the Spanish-based creole language called Chavacano developed?
What was the capital of the empire, which fell to a confederation of Islamic sultanates, originally named?
How many grew out of settlements along how many rivers?
Who wrote "New Songs of Yutai"?
Is the capital city of Gujarat the same as the most populous city?
Does West Bengal have three World Heritage Sites?
How many indigenous local languages are there in Indonesia?
How far is the cluster discovered by Charles Messier in 1781 from Earth?
Do some of the sixteen oligarchic republics in ancient India still exist today?
Is Karnataka's agriculture vulnerable to expected changes in the monsoon?
Who voiced Snorlax in the Japanese versions of the Pokémon anime and the Super Smash Bros?
Who is Psyduck voiced by in Japan?
Had Emperor Wu captured the Northern Qi emperor Gao Wei and annexed most of Northern Qi's territory by 580?
Is sugar production Uttar Pradesh's main economic industry now?
What makes it possible for the Eevee pokemon to evolve?
Liang dynasty was preceeded by the Southern Qi dynasty and succeeded by which dynasty?
Which state has a western coastal belt that is relatively flat compared to the eastern coastal belt?
Where is the IT hub that generates one-third of total IT Revenues of Kerala located?
Does the Delta Aquariids first peak on 6 August?
Can Magikarp learn the Flail move in generation 1?
How many of the Psyduck in the anime were stranded from Lake Psyduck?
What is the official language of Taiwan?
What are the two registers used in Spanish?
Is Portuguese the most spoken language in Latin America?
What is the population of Meghalaya as estimated in 2014? 
Which language family is Spanish part of?
Who spoke Arabic in the 1st century BC?
Is the Sombrero Galaxy a planet?
Is Mewto a Pokémon created by Ken Sugimori and debuted in Pokémon Red and Blue?
Does NY Virginis belong to the verified exoplanets orbiting the stars in Virgo?
Did Charmander appear in the first episode of Pokemon Indigo League?
What shape are the HCG 87 galaxies predicted to merge into?
Where are Cetus and Pisces located?
What is the most used language of Amnesty International?
Which season is Virgo constellation visible in the sky?
Does Snorlax have an evolution?
How many official languages does Puerto Rico have?
What did Kotaku writer Patricia Hernandez say about Pikachu?
What’s the time difference between Taichu calendar and Sifen Calendar?
According to the Families throughout Han China, How many parts does a soul have?
Was Prolaya Vema Reddi involved in the confederation of states that started a movement against the invading Turkic Muslim armies of the Delhi Sultanate?
Is Psyduck really dimwitted?
What do western writers often decribe the Zhou period as?
What is Armijn Pane's profession?
What language did all romance languages descend from?
How many times did the name of Presidency University change?
Is Chongqing growing faster than Ahmedabad in 2010's Forbes' list of the world's fastest growing cities?
Which star has the traditional name Tejat Posterior?
Is Snorlax #143 on the Pokédex?
When did the Sun shift from Libra on the autumnal equinox to Virgo?
Who discovered the Lagoon Nebula in 1764?
Was Telugu an official language of West Bengal in 2000?
Was India established as a republic before 1950?
What did Emperor Xiaowen's changes eventually led to?
How many Pokemon appear on the livery of the first Pokemon Jet?
Who was Emperor Wen's father?
Was Jimmy George one of the world's top three volleyball players?
What is the official lauguage of Brazil?
How many days does the sun take to pass through Virgo constellation?
What language is the Quran written in?
Where does Sagittarius pass directly overhead?
Is there direct evidence of the earlier period of development of the Shang?
What are speakers of English called?
Are oilseeds widely cultivated over large areas in Rajasthan?
From what language are most of the academic and technical vocabulary of modern Hindi borrowed?
What is Bulbasaur's Japanese name?
What is the apparent magnitude of Messier 24?
Can Charmander evolve into Mega Charizard X or Mega Charizard Y?
How much percentage does Uttar Paradesh contribute to India's population?
How many airports in Karnataka only operate internal flights?
How many km is Ranthambore National Park from Sawai Madhopur Railway Station?
Is the Capricornus the largest constellation in the zodiac?
Was Hulao recoverd by Liu Song in 430
What are newly formed words called?
Did Nagaur and Ajmer rule part of Rajasthan after the Second Battle of Tarain?
Where was the first airport in Kerala?
Where did Portuguese originate?
What nation is the fourth most populous in the world? 
What dynasty conquered the rump state of Western Liang in 587?
Who first voiced Snorlax in English?
What Indian states border Maharashtra on the north?
Did the man appointed by Shun to finish his father's work succeed?
Was planet HD 215152 b discovered in 2011?
Who first recorded Cancer?
Is Squirtle one of the starter Pokemon in Generation 2?
What proportion of English vocabular is derived from French?
Does Leo neighbor Virgo?
When was The Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve established?
What did the natives of the land call Urdu?
Does Gulzar agree that Urdu is a "dying language"?
Was Indonesia a Dutch colony?
Which is the largest university in the world in terms of the number of graduates?
Has Madhya Pradesh’s tourism industry seen considerable growth?
What is Pisces in Latin for?
When was Western Liang conquered by the Sui?
Is Psyduck a source of frustration for Misty?
How many district hospitals are in Madhya Pradesh?
How many representatives does the Meghalaya Legislative Assembly have in the Rajya Sabha?
What did the Zongyuan Yinyun do?
What is the "Kerala phenomenon?"
What lies in the westernmost part of Sagittarius?
Is Aquarius home to the Saturn Nebula?
Is Snorlax known as the "Sleeping Pokemon"?
What is the second-most populous state in India?
Where is the Ranthambore National Park located?
How many divisions does Uttar Pradesh have?
Hindi literature is broadly divided into how many prominent forms or styles?
Which language is one of the four official languages of Singapore along with English, Malay, and Tamil?
How long is Durga Puja?
Where is the Arid Forest Research Institute (AFRI) located?
Is poaching threatening animals in Karnataka?
Is Tamil Nadu in northern India?
Is West Bengal the most populous country subdivision in the world?
What time period was referred to as “Moors” by European writers?
Does the Sui dynasty discourage Buddhism?
Which ambitious local general served the Ahmadnagar Sultanate in the early 17th century?
What was the lowest recorded temperature at Bidar District in Fahrenheit?
What game is Eevee the mascot of?
What is the language named after the Angles?
What is a style of cooking developed in the Indian subcontinent by the imperial kitchens of the Mughal Empire?
Who was Sima Yan's father?
What is the most prestigious British dialect?
Who started many expensive construction projects such as the Grand Canal of China?
Is Spanish the least used language on internet websites?
Is the New Mangalore Port in Karnataka?
What currency did the Xin Dynasty use instead of the gold currency?
Is Aries recognized as an official constellation now?
Is NGC 4639 a face-on barred spiral galaxy located 78 Mly from Earth (redshift 0.0034)?
What caused modern English to spread around the world since the 17th century?
Was Javanese the native language by more than half of the residents?
Who proposed to sever a southern zone of Pisces as Testudo?
What was China's first imperial dynasty?
Who first recorded Cancer?
Which is the first Pokémon in the Pokédex?
Luther's translation of the Bible into High German took place during what period?
Do Mewtwo and Mew have different physical traits?
What district was carved out of the Khasi Hills on 28 October 1976?
Does Maharastra house the headquarters of most of the major corporate and financial institutions?
The Han dynasty was preceded by what?
Was the name of Presidency University always the same?
Is venusaur directly evolved from Bulbasaur?
Where is Libra located?
Has Misty's Psyduck evolved in the anime?
How many districts does Gujarat have?
Whose advice did Li Shimin listen to?
The discoveries of which solar system planets (or dwarf planets) were associated with Gemini?
What was a colony of the German Empire from 1884 to 1919? 
Is the Punjabi language used in education and administration in Pakistani Punjab?
Does Gujurat have more men or women?
What was the core idea of governing the country in the Han Dynasty after Emperor Wu?
How many toes do Charmander's have on each foot?
Which sea borders Karnataka to the west?
What was the first Pokemon to Mega evolve into Mega Charizard X?
Which people was the Great Wall consolidated to further secure the north border against?
Is Meghalaya the wettest place on Earth?
What is the capital of Madhya Pradesh?
Was Muslim the first religion practiced by Punjabis?
Was southern Madhya Pradesh conquered by the Turkic Delhi Sultanate in the 13th century?
Why is it usually overlooked by trainers?
When did Emperor Wuzong suprress Buddhism?
What is the longest river in Madhya Pradesh?
When did the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act come into effect?
Which poets contributed to the Three Hundred Tang Poems?
Can Snorlax be woken up by a flute?
Is there more than one religion present in the Punjabi region?
Who wrote India's national anthem?
Who expanded Han territory into the northern Korean Peninsula in 108 BC?
What is the new vocabulary from the spoken varieties used to denote?
When do the Leonids occur?
Which large region remained part of the Nizam's Hyderabad State throughout the British period?
Is Jigglypuff a playable character in the most recent Smash Bros?l
Were there any known body of Chinese writings found after 1930s?
Who voiced Bulbasaur  in the English dub since the nineth season?
Who was defeated by Jin forces at the Battle of Fei River?
When did the colonial government set up a free public education system with Spanish as the medium of instruction?
When was the Arabization Bureau added to the ECSO?
Amagaon is of which zone of Karnataka?
What is the reason that Pikachu ranks low in the best Pokemons?
Whose defense led to the withdawl of Taizong in the Goguryeo–Tang War in 644?
Pikachu's inspiration changed from a squirrel to a mouse
Did Meghalaya attain statehood on 11 January 1938?
Was Muspili written in Old Low German?
Is 5% of the Kerala's income is made from the fishery industry?
Did the British occupation of Manila during the Seven Years' War take place in between 1898 and 1946?
Which dynasty adopted the political system of the Sui?
Is the female sex ratio in urban and rural  Meghalaya higher than the national average?
What is the adverbial form of good?
What is the episode name in which Ash Ketchum's Squirtle first appeared in?
What world record do Bhadla Solar Park have?
Is West Bengal located in the Western region of India?
Did Massignon's attempt at Romanization succeed?
What is the second most common language in Canada?
What is the fourth most-spoken language in the world?
Is Beta Cancri a binary star system?
Is Andhra Pradesh the sixth-largest state by area in India?
Where was the Battle of Zhizhi?
What move does Magikarp learn at level 1?
How many German authors have won the Nobel prize in literature?
How far is the Nongkhnum Island from Nongstoin?
Is West Benegal on the eastern bottleneck of India ?
How many Generation I Pokemon designs are there?
What is the mass of Sagittarius A*?
Which dynasty suceeded the Shang Dynasty?
Is the female literacy rate higher than the male literacy rate in Maharashtra?
Which Pokémon has the second most potential evolutions?
What is the brightest star in the Sagittarius constellation?
What was the native language in the Delhi region of India?
How many major royal tombs were discovered at the Ruins of Yin?
Which dynasty emerged in the Punjab in ninth century?
Did the Emperor Taiwu of Northern Wei make the Xiongnu-led Hu Xia dynasty his attack target in 426?
How many novae are faster than U Scorpii?
After whom is the Dvivedi Yug in Hindi Literature named?
Is the ancient city of Dholavira a small site in India?
What percent of Bengali words are from foreign languages?
When is Cancer best visible?
Who designed Bulbasaur?
Did most Chinese people living in many parts of South China speak only their local variety until the mid-20th century?
What color is Bulbasaur's body?
Is it true that Zeus raised both Orion and a scorpion to the sky because of their fight?
Did Atsuko Nishida design Charizard before Charmander?
Does Mega Charizard X have a dragon type?
In what region is the Aquarius constellation found?
How many people speak English as their second language?
What was Abanindranath Tagore's occupation?
What was not fully accepted as a constellation until classical times?
Did the Tang unified the Northern and Southern dynasties?
Did the first half of the Sui dynasty have richer resource than the second half of the Sui dynasty?
In spanish, the noun and adjuective systems exhibit three genders
What did the message that Ino falsified say?
Which is the second most widely spoken language of the 22 scheduled languages of India.
How many Shakti peethas exist in the world?
What is the second most popular religion in Andhra Pradesh?
Is Kerala the 15th largest Indian state by population?
Which centery was Rajasthan formed in?
Is it usual that many German dialects are considered to be separate languages?
When did the British East India Company choose Urdu as the language to replace Persian across northern India?
What is the official language of Delhi?
What prevented the establishment of any standardized "national" language in early medieval Russia during Mongol rule?
Was religion a significant part of peoples' lives during the Tang dynasty?
Are Buddhists a majority in Andhra Pradesh?
What is Snorlax called in Japan?
How many divisions does Rajasthan have?
What are the cases for German adjectives?
Is Charizard playable in every Super Smash Bros. game that it appears in?
How many stars of the first or second magnitude does Leo have?
What is Eevee's minigame called in Pokémon Stadium 2?
Approximately how many minor seaports does Maharashtra have?
Do tourists who come to India like to visit Kerala?
which language is the sixth-largest in the world by number of speakers?
What are the eight evolutions of Eevee called?
Was the Standard Mandarin adopted in writing in the mid-20th century?
Español derives from which Occitan word?
Does Psyduck appear in Pokemon Yellow?
Which dialect was settled as the standard national language?
Who is India's highest award in cinema named after?
Which chapters of Indonesia's constitution address the use of Indonesian?
What do the two stars, whose names mean "sting", mark?
How many stars mark the sickle used to represent the Leo constellation?
When did Guillaume Le Gentil discover the Lagoon Nebula?
Does Squirtles have brown-orange shells ?
What are other common ways to refer to the Jin dynasty?
Did Charmander liked by people and was profitable in merchandise?
Which three rivers surround the Nongkhnum Island?
What was the population of China in the 10th century?
What was the last generation where Charizard failed to make a major impact on the competitive scene?
After the partition, the western part of Punjab became part of which country?
How many grammatical genders does German have?
What reforms helped the dynasty become a golden age of prosperity?
What makes up the bulge at the center of the Sombrero Galaxy?
Does the form você exist in Rio Grande do Sul? 
What year did Emperor Wu die?
What year did Ouyang He rebel?
Was Tang dynasty an imperial dynasty of China?
Which emperor's reign in Liu Song is known as the Reign of Yuanjia?
What does Ananda Bazar Patrika produce?
What are the three official languages in Belgium?
What is the three-letter abbreviation for the constellation?
When is Punjab's monsoon season?
When Jigglypuff is exposed to a Moon Stone, what does it evolve into?
How did Gangam Sudhir Kumar Reddy respond to the Bombay High Court's claim that Hindi is the national language of India?
What is the main ethnic group in West Bengal?
Which region of India is Maharastra in?
How many states in India have bicameral state legislatures?
Are there more males or females in Karnataka?
Who flees every summer after Zeus raised the two combatants to the sky in Greek mythology of Scorpio?
What is Denebola and Deneb named for the Arabic word?
The recognition of Aries as an official constellation occurred by what governmental body?
Which party won in the 1995 Assembly elections?
What does Jigglypuff's name refer to?
In what version of the games are Charmander and the other starters replaced by Pikachu?
Who was the last ruler of the Chen dynasty?
Can Chloe Cerise's Eevee evolve?
How many star systems are known to have planets?
Where is West Bengal located?
What ethic origin is also associated with the Li family, besides Han?
Does Munchlax evolve into a Snorlax when it has a sufficiently high level of friendship with its Trainer?
Did the kings of Athens sacrifice wine to the gods?
Is English an Indo-European language?
Can two of the last three syllables be stressed?
Which language is spoken by the majority in the fourth most populous nation in the world?
When did Moorish invasion begin?
When did a standardized literary form of the Russian language emerge?
What animal is Pikachu?
Are Bengali nouns assigned gender?
In which year did Han dynasty have the upper hand in conflict with Xiongnu?
Did Emperor Wen seek an alliance with Northern Wei?
Is Beta Aquarii the brightest star of Aquarius?
What king defeated the Huns in 528?
Which language is written in Latin script, whose diagraphs were formerly considered single letters?
Did the Qing dynasty fall in 1950 AD?
How can the Beta Taurid meteor shower be observed?
What was the first widely practiced religion in Punjab?
What Pokemon is the only starter in Red, Blue, and Green that has a dual typing?
Are the five Squirtle honorary firefighters in the first eposode?
Is Punjab in the southern part of India?
Is Karnataka the largest Indian state by area?
What is the meaning of Cancer?
What percentage of India's forest area is in Madhya Pradesh?
Is Barak Valley located n Assam?
Which is the official language of the state of Karnataka?
What stars are arranged in chains that curve throughout the cluster?
In what year was Charmander included in a game again?
Is true that Islam is the second most common religion in Indian Punjab?
Did the ruler of the Saka satraps (100 CE) found the Kardamaka dynasty?
The predominant ethnolinguistic group of the Punjab region is the Punjabi people who speak English
What year of the law passed that require a foreigner to stay in China after marrying a Chinese Women?
Does West Bengal have low unemployment?
In 2015, does Google report an increase or decrease in Hindi-content consumption year-on-year?
When was India partitioned?
Is Rajasthan a state in northern India?
Was Cai Lun 55 years old when he invented the standard papermaking process?
In March 2013, what was the most-used language on the Internet?
Has Pikachu ever made an appearance in an American music video? 
Is the forestry industry in Meghalaya commercial?
In which year did the British establish a settlement in present-day Chennai?
What are the three standardized variants of German? 
Is English a West Germanic lanugage?
What industries were nationalized as a result of the economic growth of the Han dynasty?
What color is Pikachu's cheeks?
What period does U Scorpii have?
What is the earliest known body of Chinese writing?
Where does the majority of the world's French-speaking population live?
Does Uttar Pradesh have over 500 million inhabitants?
Is it true that more than 10% of people in Europe speak Spanish as their mother togue?
Is Rajasthan the largest state economy in India?
What gender, other than male and female, does German use grammatically?
What is the brightest star in the constellation?
What Pokemon evolves into Venusaur?
How many phonological divisions are there?
Why is Kerala considered "baby-friendly?"
Who reestablished the Jin government at present-day Nanjing?
When was Han recognized by the Zhou court as an independent state?
Who founded the Liu Song  dynasty?
Is French the most taught foreign language in the EU?
Did the Tang dynasty recognize other foreign religions?
Who found the Sui dynasty?
Who created the Pokémon named Charizard?
Is Maharashtra bordered by the Arabian Sea?
What is the official language of Monaco?
Pieces is between which constellations?
Which song is about the weakness of Magikarp?
Which language family does English belong to?
When is the first possible syllabus always stressed?
What are examples of wealthy clothes during the Han period?
What is Leo's constellation location hemisphere?
Are there lots of wildlife in Karnataka?
Was Aries fully accepted as a constellation before classical times?
How much of India's total geographical area does Rajasthan cover?
Did Magikarp appear in Detective Pikachu?
What caused a growth in the Kerala tourism industy?
Who created Mewtwo? 
Did Atsuko Nishida design Flareon?
How many divisions is Rajasthan divided into?
Do more people in modern day Pakistan practice Sunni Muslim religion than Shia Muslim?
What is the previous evolution stage of Mega Venusaur?
Where is the capital of the Sui dynasty under Emperor Yang?
Why have scientists researched Magikarp?
How many modern-day countries make up the colony of French Indochina?
How many native speakers of Russian live in Ukraine?
Do Pikachus have gender differences between them?
Were stars of Pisces incorporated in any Chinese astronomy?
Who is the boss of Team Rocket?
Is Uttar Pradesh the second biggest state in India?
Is Porrima a star in the Leo constellation?
Is Karnataka the first-largest state by population?
Who was the first emperor of the Qin dynasty?
When did the British annex Punjab?
When was the Royal Spanish Academy founded?
What is the capital of Karnataka? 
How long did Dong Zhongshu live? 
Were is the Indus Valley civilisation centered at?
How tall is Mewtwo?
Who founded the Shang dynasty?
How many total members are part of Karnataka's government?
Does the majority of the population and the major tribal groups in Meghalaya follow a patrillineal system?
Is the liturgical language of the religion of Islam a Semitic language?
How many days it takse for Sun to pass through the Virgo?
What constellation's name is Latin for weighing scales?
When was the Maratha Navy disbanded?
How many vowels are there in Indonesian?
How many phonemes do most dialects of English have?
In summer 548	 which former general of Eastern Wei rebelled and in 549 captured Jiankang?
Do Indonesians primarily speak French?
How many days are in the Shang week?
What did Yu's success in stopping the flooding increase?
What is the first dynasty in traditional Chinese historiography?
What is Arabic named after?
Could slaves in the Han dynasty come and go from their master's home as they pleased?
Who proposed three circles model?
What is Virgo's brightest star?
What religion helped Arabic to spread?
What Machines can Pokémon learn moves from?
Who led the campaign for a lexical injection in Arabic?
How much has Snorlax been said to weigh?
Who founded the Tang dynasty?
What is Latin for maiden?
Who liked Psyduck when it was just charmingly dopey?
Who do the term Hindi originally refer to?
What is the Sui dynasty's lasting legacy?
Who gives a closely related, but slightly different account of the Shang dynasty?
Is Spanish the official language of more than one international organization?
How many nouns, pronouns and adjectives in the German language?
How many imperial dynasties were before Han?
In the German lore of Antenteh, how many magical fish did Antenteh meet?
Which Sui emperor found a dynasty which played laid the foundation for the Tang dynasty?
Is Libra home to one bright globular cluster called NGC 5897?
Which Indian myth did the character who won the war against the Devas come from?
Who described Cancer as a scarab?
In what year did the astronomer John Hill propose to sever a southern zone of Pisces as Testudo?
What makes Magikarp an E target to predators?
When did Old Norse words enter the English Language?
Was Pikachu stronger than Mewtwo in the original games in terms of stats?
Was the Jaintia Hills district created in the 20th century?
Who dominated the Deccan region from the 1st century to the 3rd century?
Who deposed and kill Xiao Zhengde inn 549?
Who established the Sikh empire based in Punjab?
Did Kevin Slackie of Paste list Venusaur as 1st of the best Pokémon? 
Who was the last king of the Xia dynasty?
When was the first Gujarati film, Narsinh Mehta, released?
Can Snorlax's stomach can dissolve any kind of poison?
What events caused the crisis that led to the peasants' suffering?
What event led to the Polygar war?
How big is the constellation Aries?
Is there a Pokémon with higher stats than Mewto?
How far from Earth is NGC 5897?
Is John Oliver a pokemon killer?
A third standard of which language has arisen in Karachi since 1947?
Which host kills Jigglypuff while Playing Pokemon Go?
Did Wang Mang help the rich maintain their wealth? 
Is Mewtwo stronger than Mew?
What was Wang Mang's attempt at achieving a better balance between the competing schools of thought?
How long did Confucius live?
Does Rajasthan has more than 6 national parks and wildlife sanctuaries?
Which country does Eevee's designers come from?
When did the Han court establish the Wuwei frontier commandery?
Who was Eevee created by?
How many Eeveelutions were introduced later in the Pokemon franchise?
Is agriculture important in Uttar Pradesh.
Grains and staple production covers about what percentage of the land area dedicated to crops?
Is Charizard a playable character in every Super Smash Bros game?
What does Rajya Sabha translate to?
Does the eldest son also have the potential of becoming a progenitor and fostering a new trunk lineage ?
Who is the 19th Chief minister of Maharashta?
Where do the majority of Spanish speakers live today?
Can we see Pleaides and the Hyadas with the naked eye?
What language family is Spanish in?
How many states are in the south of India?
Who created Snorlax?
Who succeded Chen as emperor?
Which century was Karnataka formed in?
Who created Mewtwo?
What is the official language of Meghalaya?
Until now, is the usage of Charizard still low because another Pokemon outclasses it?
Which city attracts forty million domestic tourists  annually?
Is Virgo sometimes associated with the Blessed Virgin Mary?
Is NH 8 India's second 4-8 lane highway?
Did taxes increase or decrease to fund Chen Shubao's construction projects?
Does French has the most number of speakers in France?
Is air transport in Karnataka expanding slowly?
Is bronze primarily being used for primarily utilitarian?
Whose succession marks the start of the Xia dynasty?
Does #143 in the Pokédex weigh 500kg?
Do Francophones make up the majority of the population in New Caledonia?
How do players acquire Magikarp that know more than Splash, Tackle, Flail, Hydro Pump, and Bounce?
What should the player give Mewtwo to activate two Mega Evolved forms?
Who is Mewtwo cloned from?
Which star in the Sagittarius constellation has a magnitude of 3.96 and is located towards the bottom center of the map?
In what video game did Squirtle first appear in?
Is Indonesia the most populous nation in the world?
In which Pokémon generation was Eevee introduced?
What country borders Bengal in the east?
What is another name for the Southern Chen?
When was Bulbasaur's video game debut?
What languages are official in Belgium?
What type of variable star is Deneb Algedi?
Who was the successor of Emperor Gaozong?
Is "cat" singular or plural?
What were Eevee's initial evolutions?
According to Keralolpathi, who expelled the sea from the land that is guarded by Vasuki?
Is the question of whether High Malay or Low Malay was the true parent of the Indonesian language answered?
How many stars in Capricornus are above magnitude 2.5
Red's Eevee which could transform from Vaporeon, Flareon, and Jolteon at will was experimented on by who?
Does the Bulbasaur's onion morphology help it survive?
Is "cup-carrier" a Latin name of Aquarius?
French is the third most widely spoken language in the EU
Which part of China was Mandarin originated from?
Who designed Pikachu?
Is the state whose capital is Bangalore the only southern state to have land borders with all of the other four southern Indian sister states?
Who did King Athamas marry after Nephele?
What was the lingua franca of the Hanseatic League?
Is the state cricket team of Karnataka the most successful?
When does the Sun appear in Libra?
Is the star SDSS J102915+172927 (Caffau's star) a population II star in the galactic halo seen in Leo?
What states and territories in the United states were ruled by Spain?
What is the area of West Bengal in square kilometeres?
Is the most spoken languages the official language of the state?
Is the Leo Triplet inside the Leo constellation?
Does English have a national authority to set the standard?
What color are Eevee's paw pads?
When does the Sun appear in the constellation Taurus?
What is the flora of Maharashtra in composition?
How many Urdu publications are there in India?
Who conquered Eastern Wu?
Who is the creator of Charmander?
What are the two official languages of the Government of India?
What dynasty replaced the Eastern Jin after it was usurped by General Liu Yu?
How many genders are there in German?
Since when has Kerala been a major spice exporter? 
Who is the producer of the Pokémon series?
Who does Aquarius represent?
When was the Islamic conquests in the Indian subcontinent?
How long did the Western Han dynasty last? 
Who is the author of Meteorologica?
What ancient Hindu epic chronicles the history of dynasties in the Punjab?
How many people were involved in the designing of Eevee's evolution?
Where is the largest population of native speakers?
What color is the Zubenelekrab star?
Did the Mongols invade the Punjab region?
What stars is Gemini dominated by?
Is French the most widely spoken language in the EU?
Which empire ruled Rajputana before the Maratha Empire?
Is Charizard a lizard or dragon?
Who now voices Snorlax in English?
What was the term Hindī originally used to refer to?
What does the official emblem of Karnataka have in the center?
What is Jiankang now known as?
Who created Psyduck?
Has English been spoken in Oceania since 1456?
Magikarp can only learn how many moves by level?
What marked the end of the Nothern and Southern dynasties period?
How did the Xin dynasty die?
Why is Javanese hard to become the national language in the newly independent country of Indonesia?
How many massive floods happened during Wang’s regime? 
Can a Psyduck evolve into a Golduck?
When was the Association of Spanish Language Academies created?
Did Luoyang became the fisrt largest city in the empire?
Is West Germanic considered a dialect of English today?
Of which dynasty is the Xin dynasty considered an intteregnum period?
Is the constellation Libra visible at latitude 90°N? 
The shape of what feature of Magikarp inspired its Japanese name?
Is Hakka one of the seven major groups of dialects in China?
How much area in square kilometres does Gujarat cover?
Is M35 or NGC 2158 farther away from Earth?
Where was Phrixos about to be sacrifice?
What animal is Pikachu's original design, especially its cheeks, based on? 
Was Antoine Polier a Swiss-French soldier? 
What constellation is to the east of Libra?
Does the Taiwanese standard of Mandarin differs very =much from that of mainland China?
What dialect was Robert Morrison's Chinese dictionary based on?
Which state is Kerala bordered by to the north and northeast?
What is the population of Gujarat?
Where are Bavarian dialects of German most spoken?
What is an earthquake weathervane able to do?
Which pokemon was Charmander based on?
Which state has the 10th largest economy in India?
In Pokémon Red and Blue, and their remakes, who will sell the player a Magikarp?
Did Shang dynasty formed in the generation of Xie?
Is there more than one proposed starting date for the Shang dynasty?
In which year did the Sui amass 518,000 troops along the northern bank of the Yangtze River?
What is a Portuguese-speaking person called?
How many planets are in the Gliese 581 planetary system?
When was Mewtwo started commonly referred to as a "clone" in Japanese sources?
What was the first national language of Pakistan?
How many affiliated colleges does the largest university in the world in terms of the number of graduates have?
Based on what feature, most arguments for a single ANA language were based on?
Is Mandarin an official language of Singapore?
Can magikarp learn 3 moves by level in the first generation of Pokémon games?
To which earlier dynasty is the Sui dynasty often compared?
What is the capital of West Bengal?
How long has English has been written in a Latin alphabet?
What is the rank of Snorlax in Pokédex
Did Ptolemy described the asterism Terebellum consisting of four 6th magnitude stars?
Where would Gurjaratra currently be located in?
What is Mewtwo's signature move in the Pokemon games?
What is Charizard’s design inspired by?
Why was Charizard crippled by Stealth Rock in the fourth generation?
Is Hou Jing Prince of Henan?
What was the name of Karnataka before 1973?
Which language does Urdu share grammar with?
Does Madhya Pradesh rank 25th among Indian states in human development index?
Were the inhabitants of ancient Gujarat commercialy active?
Who was the Jin Dynasy founded by?
Who was the largest producer of milk in the  world in 2010?
Who defeated defeated Dou Jiande in the Battle of Hulao?
Did Xiao Daocheng usurped the throne of Liu Song and became emperor of the new Southern Qi dynasty in 479?
Who designed Charizard?
Who was the successor of Emperor Taizong?
In its video game debut, how many other starter pokemon are there along with Bulbasaur?
What does Ivysaur evolve into?
Is Gliese 581c important for establishing the likelihood of life outside of the Solar System?
How long was Narendra Modi the chief minister of Gujarat?
Who killed Liu Shao?
In Pokémon Red and Blue, where does Mewto escape to after destroying the laboratory in a Guyana jungle?
Do the religious majorities of Panjab vary by region?
Did natural disasters increase or decrease the effectiveness of the central government?
What province is French the mother tongue for approximately 80% of the population?
Is Libra home to Gliese 581 planetary system?
What century was the overhaul of Grammar realized by Ibn Mada’ of Cordoba first proposed?
Is Altarf a binary star system?
Do a majority of Muslims speak Classical Arabic?
What was the purpose when desinging the transition between Bulbasaur and Venasaur?
Is the NGC 520 an isolated face-on prototypical spiral galaxy?
What is Snorlax's Z-Move in Pokémon Sun, Moon?
What did May's Eevee that hatched from an egg evolve into?
For how many days is the sun in Scorpius per year?
Was Liu Yu born into poverty?
Did Northern Qi successfully install Xiao Tui?
Does Eevee have blue feather?
Which river is the term "Hindi" derived from?
What is the most recent Eeveelution?
Does the International Mother Language Day by UNESCO commemorate the killing of five protestors?
What percent of the British population speaks in Recieved Pronunciation?
What is the language family of German?
Where was Aurangzeb born?
Who created Mewtwo?
What was the "first diplomatic blow" against the French language according to Stanley Meisler?
Who established the Han dynasty?
How many turns does the G-Max Move, G-Max Vine Lash, damge non Grass-type Pokémon?
How many people in Nepal speak Hindi as a first language according to the 2011 Nepal census?
Is Wei the first of the Northern dynasties?
Do you need more than your naked eye to see Cancer under city skies? 
In Greek Mythology, do Castor and Pollux share the same father?
Where is Gemini located?
What is the second most spoken language in China?
Who make up the majority of Meghalaya's population?
What topics the inscriptions provide critical insight into?
How many voice actors does Ash's Squirtle have throughout the Pokemon anime?
What is the name of the musical style in Kerala that includes the percussive paandi variant?
Is it a strong swimmer? 
What is Charmander known as in Japan?
Are Standard Chinese, Spanish, and English the three most spoken native language in the world?
What was the capital of the Chola dynasty?
What is the distance between CL 0024+1654 and Earth?
How many forms of English are there?
Who killed Xiao Guan?
Why was it hard to come up with Pikachu's name?
What century did conversion from indigenous to Christianity begin?
Which industry employs approximately 1.2 million people in Kerala?
The Gujarat encomprasses 21 sites of the ancient Indus Valley civilisation
Who was the kshatrapa dynasty replaced by?
Did the International Astronomical Union always recognized Aries as an official constellation?
What does Magikarp evolve into?
How did Emperor Gong die?
What is the most common language in Canada?
From what was Xie born?
Is -en a inflectional ending in German?
What is the second largest Indian state by area?
What duty did the kings lose in 145 BC?
Who generally regard the Tang as a high point in Chinese civilization?
Were discoveries of novae in 1860 common?
When did the Chinese court officially sponsored Confucianism?
Is English the most spoken language in the world?
Is Rajasthan the largest producer of oilseeds in India?
Are French nouns inflected for number and not for gender?
In what video games did Mewtwo debut?
Why did Emperor Ming lose his northern commandries?
What countries make up the Punjab region?
What is one language that is a close relative to Russian?
Where are most of the national parks located in India?
Where is Standard Indonesian used?
Can Magikarp learn Hydro Pump and Bounce in every generation?
Is Urdu the only official language of Pakistan?
What is the smallest zodiac constellation?
What does Koduck use to deliver scratches?
Is the Flame Pokémon final evolution of Charmander?
Whom had Hou put under house arrest?
Was Jolteon designed by Atsuko Nishida?
Which monster did Pan save himself from?
How long did the modern state Karnataka maintain the name of Mysore?
How many seats the state contributes to the lower house Lok Saba 
What are the three procedural languages of the EU?
What device is PokéPark 2: Wonders Beyond played on?
Did the Punjab region continuously flourish?
Which dynasty succeeded the Eastern Jin dynasty?
Can Charizard fly?
Are the vast majority of people in Portugal Lusophones?
Was there frequent sea trade during the Shang period?
What percentage of the total population in Kerala is not part of the Tamil population in the Idukki district?
What level does Squirtle evolve into Wartortle?
Which group of people emerged as the major power in southern Punjab after the Umayyad caliphate conquered the region?
What type of Jewish are Ladino speakers?
How many installments of Pokemon Snap are there?
Who conquered Eastern Wu?
In what year did the Pandyan kingdom surrender to the Hoysalas and the Yadavas?
Do more than 10% of people in India speak fluent English?
In what way is Punjabi the major language?
In what region is Pikachu not available without trading?
How many Spanish native Speakers are there?
In Pokémon Red and Blue, where do scientists discover Mew?
Is Portuguese the most spoken language in Latin America?
What is the name of the most evolved form of Bulbasaur possible in Pokémon X and Y?
When is Eevee's first appearance in the anime?
What does "Old Arabic" constitute?
Does Rajasthan have the largest state economy in India?
Is Eevee easy to find in the game?
Did Psyduck only appear in the Pokémon series?
Is the majority of German vocabulary derived from Latin and Greek?
Which ability of Mew does Mewtwo lack?
What is the similarity between Portuguese and other Neo-Latin and European languages?
When did Muhammad Ghori decisively defeated Prithviraj at the Second Battle of Tarain?
How many native speakers does Bengali have?
Which communities do the Jews in Mumbai belong to?
Does each region of Rajasthan speak the same  dialect?
How did English overtake Spanish in the Phillippines?
What is the first lunar mansion in Hindu astronomy called?
What is the possible future of three galaxies of HCG 87?
Is English an official Language of the Phillipines?
Did Mewtwo destroy the laboratory where it was born?
Is Bengali the most widely spoken language in India?
How can Mewtwo use telekinesis of flight?
Was Zuogeng accompanied by a constellation depicting an official in charge of pasture distribution?
What metal was the most important to the Shang Dynasty?
Is English an an official language in Pakistan
Which evolution did Howard Clifford's Eevee take in Detective Pikachu?
Is Cancer the dimmest zodiacal constellation?
What major Romance language has preserved most verbal inflections from classical Latin?
Who founded the early literary tradition of Hindavi?
What is the brightest star in Gemini?
Which political entity has existed at the same time as the early Zhou?
Was Russian introduced in North America before 17th century?
Is the most popular sport in Madhya Pradesh the same as the state sport?
What color is Eevee's fur?
In what region is Ash's Pikachu in present-day in the Pokemon anime?
Do 3 billion people speak English as their first language?
What is the literal meaning of qiaoren?
Has Psyduck appeared in more than one Nintendo64 Pokemon game?
Was father-in-law Yang Jian seized power as regent after Northern Zhou's Emperor Xuan died?
Who owns the sun chariot?
Is the non-past tense of English marked in third person singular?
When was Liu Shao's father assassinated? 
Are there multiple states in India that are goverened through a parliamentary system of representative democracy?
Who got a shaggy haired Eevee nicknamed Sandy in Sun and Moon?
How many square miles did the Chola Empire span at its peak?
What is the official language of Uttar Pradesh?
Was the semiautonomous kingdoms larger than the centrally controlled commanderies by the beginning of the Western Han?
In what year did Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou capture Northern Qi's capital Yecheng?
What is the traditional name of 40 Leonis?
Is Charmander one of Ash’s most used pokemon?
What was a major provincial capital of the Indus Valley Civilization?
What is the major economic feature of the Punjab?
What does Virgo mean in latin?
What is the apparent magnitude of the brightest star in Cancer?
What is most influential dialect of Mandarin?
Is Virgo the largest constellation in the sky?
Was the Liu Song economy doing well during the rule of Yuanjia?
What are Gujarat's major cities?
Who was Emperor Yao's successor?
Does Aquarius have any particularly bright stars?
Where is the "furrow" in Virgo?
Was more than 50% of the Belarusian population fluent in Russian in 2006?
Could one find a Squirtle plush toy to buy? 
Who created Psyduck?
Are Taglish and Bislish similar code-switching methods?
Who was put under house arrest by Hou Jing in 549?
Are all fins of Magikarp white?
Who is Scorpius associated with in Greek mythology?
What is the ranking of Karnataka among Indian states in Human Development Index?
Who swept accross the Khyber Pass and founded the Mughal Empire in the 16th century?
What are elephants referred to as in Malayalam literature?
Where was the first systemic written use of Spanish?
What dynasty is Gujarat derived from?
Who put Emperor Wu under house arrest?
Is the standard form of Bengali today from the cultural centre during the standardisation of Bengali?
Who wrote the first two verses of Vande Matram?
Since when has Kerala been a major spice exporter?
When did the modern struggle for independence begin?
According to the 2020 census, how many people in the U.S. population were Hispanic or Hispanic American by origin?
What is the meaning of Aries in Latin?
Who was Indonesia's second president?
Can the player see a wild Gyarados in Pokémon Snap?
What caused Buddhism and Jainism to dissappear from Kerala?
What is the official, national, and most widely spoken language of Bangladesh?
Epsilon Geminids meteors have a higher velocity than what?
In which video game did Eevee gain access to upgrade the move Last Resort to its exclusive Z-Move, Extreme Evoboost, while holding its unique Z-Crystal Eevium Z.?
How many percent more is the rural population in Meghalaya below the poverty line than those in urban areas? 
Who ruled Karnataka directly before the imperial Kannada did?
Is Hindi the second language in Gujarat in 2001?
Does the oldest surviving wooden halls in China date to the Han dynasty?
Does Charmander have similarities with Charizard?
Is Eevee in Pokemon Go?
Who allowed the last Shang king's son to rule the Shang as a vassal kingdom?
How many bright stars does Aries possess?
Has Cancer ever been described as a lobster?
How many genders does the Spanish noun system have?
Is the name Aries Latin for farmhand?
What is former east Pakistan called now?
Does the Sombrero Galaxy have a bulge at its center?
Who launched the raid that killed Wang Sengbian?
Who is the earliest recorded member of the Xia clan?
Which university's founding was the author of 'An English-Hindustani Dictionary, A Grammar of the Hindoostanee Language, The Oriental Linguist' involved in?
How did Li Yuan attract a following during his bid for power?
Psyduck has appeared in anime, films and merchandise
What country are the states of Ceará and Piauí located in? 
Is English an official language in Guam?
Was Bal Gangadhar Tilak a leader in the modern struggle for independence?
Is Spanish the most spoken native language?
Are there more females than males in  Karnataka?
What is another name of Spanish?
Was the Tang dynasty reached its height during the reign of Emperor Gaozong?
Are vowels shortened in open syllables in Received Pronunciation?
What were Squirtle's original designs scrapped for?
Was Li Jiancheng killed by his brother?
Which star is at the opposite end of the constellation to Alpha Leonis?
Are Snorlax's arms too short to grab food and eat?
What is the highest point in the Garo Hills?
How long is the period of the fastest known nova?
Who outlawed the use of the Dutch language? 
When do the Epsilon Geminids peak?
Is Gliese 581d considered to be the first Earth-like extrasolar planet to be found within its parent star's habitable zone?
When does the sun appear in the constellation Libra?
What two main galaxies and star clusters are contained within Capricornus?
Han Confucianism in Emperor Wu’s reign was the creation of whom? 
GamesRadar described what as "the ultimate in terms of being the strongest Pokémon"?
Which star in the Sagittarius constellation is a triple star whose one of the components has a magnitude of 6.0? 
Is Suniti Kumar Chatterji a linguist?
Do the majority of people in Meghalaya practice Christianity?
In the animated series, how many Squirtle are in the Squirtle Squad?
What are the two branches of government in West Bengal?
Who first recorded the Cancer constellation?
Around how many phonemes does German have? 
What group of germanic languages does German belong to?
Did the Grand Canal facilitate domestic trade?
Who was the third son and sixth child of Shah Jahan and Mumtaz Mahal?
Are movies produced in Tamil Nadu?
Who established Xin dynasty?
Where do Pikachu have brown markings?
Did Yu passed by his house three times?
Who claimed responsibility for one of the three terrorist attacks between 2006 and 2010?
What is the state festival of Karnataka?
What made Han forces' military campaigns enhance economic prosperity?
who is the founder of the Tang dynasty?
What are phonemes?
What are the three standardized variants of German?
How many times has Maharashtra been subject to President's rule since it's formation?
Is Maharashtra the second-largest state by area in India?
What was Wang Mang's fief?
Was the Chen Dynasty the second-to-last dynasty of the Southern dynasties during the Northern and Southern dynasties period?
Did Chinese armies in 1300 BC use chariots?
Is Magikarp a strong swimmer?
In which script is Urdu written?
What is the fifth-largest Indian state by area?
Is Magikarp a strong swimmer?
Is Denebola brighter than Deneb Algedi?
Who was Lady Hou a consort of?
In Greek mythology	 several myths associated with Scorpio attribute it to who? 
Till when was French the sole official language of Puducherry?
Did the Mughals rule Madhya Pradesh before the Marathas took control of most of Madhya Pradesh?
Why has the First Point of Aries moved into Pisces?
In which battle the predecessors of Emperor Aurangzeb of the Mughals gained control of Madhya Pradesh? 
Is French the most spoken language in the EU? 
Did Charmander’s design make it look like it would evolve into Charizard?
Does English have about 570,000 words?
What is the official lanuage of the Rajasthan?
What are the Low Franconian dialects spoken in Germany referred to as?
Is it true that Prague (German: Prag) and Budapest (Buda, German: Ofen) were Germanized because of their incorporation into the Habsburg domain?
Who forced Xiao Cha to surrender to the Western Wei?
When was the Erlitou culture rediscovered?
What mountain lies at the southwestern end of the Aravalli Range?
When did the Arabic language first emerge?
How is Chennai port different than other ports in Tamil Nadu?
Is Rajasthan famous for its national parks and wildfires?
How many noble Xianbei surname in Northern Wei?
Is Eevee a Pokémon?
How many deep sky objects that are in the Messier catalog does Aquarius contain?
Are German, Austrian, and Russian the three standardized variants of German? 
Who is Arabic named after?
Is Cancer the dimmest zodiac constellation?
Does Mew appear more gentle than Mewtwo?
Is Kannada the largest language of Karnataka?
What is the second-most populous state in India?
Who listed Capricornus as one of the 48 modern constellations?
Is the Yin dynasty the earliest dynasty of traditional Chinese history firmly supported by archaeological evidence?
How many of Scorpio's stars are named "sting"?
Who discovered M35 (NGC 2168)?
What is the population of Gujarat?
What language has the CCP promoted?
What does Squirtle evolve into in the main series games?
What religion was the major power in southern Punjab?
What are speakers of English called?
Is Kilithattukali native to Kerala?
How many letters does the Russian alphabet consist of?
Is Russian taught in Ukrainian primary schools?
Around which year did the Dutch establish a settlement in Pulicat?
Is Portuguese the official language of many countries?
Is Mewtwo a Pokémon or a fictional creature from Nintendo and Game Freak?
Did the Madras State eventually become Tamil Nadu? 
How many wildlife sanctuaries does Meghalaya have?
Do male and female Magikarp have the same long barbels?
Does everyone in Maharashtra follow a vegetarian  diet?
How long did the attempts of Gun to stop the flooding last?
What is the constellation that means weighing scales in Latin?
What percentage of the population in Belarus was fluent in Russian in 2006?
When did Emperor Wuzong enacted policies to suppress Buddhism?
What is the meaning of Hind_ (Iranian Persian pronunciation: Hendi)?
How many times did the Shang move their capital?
What percentage of the Recorded Forest Area in Maharashtra is protected forest (rounded to the nearest percent)?
In which paper did Aristotl claim that he observed Jupiter in conjunction with and then occulting a star in Gemini?
When did Emperor Xuanzong discarded the policy of conscripting soldiers?
Which site is the visited by millions of devotees in Andhra Pradesh?
Who do some historians believe introduced the forced suicide of the crown prince's mother?
Was Qin Shi Huang died in 221-207 BC?
What is the native language of the Russians?
In which country does Aries have symbolic and mythological importance?
Were animal bones among the typical ancient Chinese writing materials in the 1st millennium BC?
When did the central government close commandery mints and monopolize the issue of coinage?
Who is the founder of Tang dynasty?
Does Karnataka have the largest economy  out of all the Indian States?
Was Lady Qian empress?
Which game are Bulbasaur, Charmander, and Squirtle available at the start of in the new games?
Who was the Prince of Linchuan's older brother
Who begged German lore of Antenteh to ask for a beautifully furnished home from a magical fish?
How many main airports are there is Rajasthan?
Who later makes a guest appearance on the Pokémon anime series?
Is Cancer a bright constellation?
Did the Middle Indo-Aryan dialects have an official status during the Gupta Empire?
What was the Jin dynasty?
Did tourist inflow to Kerala increase from 2005 to 2011?
Does Aries have the Sigma Arietids meteor shower visible from 12 to 19 October?
Who called Magikarp a "Water wussymon"?
Is Daily Pasban published in Urdu?
Is Venusaur in Super Smash Bros. Ultimate?
Who is Ash's second female companion?
What Pokémon appearn on the port side of All Nippon Airway's Pocket Monsters Boeing 747 jumbo jet?
Can a player activate the Mega Mewtwo X form by giving Mewtwonite X  to Mewtwo?
Is Snorlax a noseless ursid-like pokemon with a large head and feet compared to most Pokemon?
Does Gujarat have the longest coastline in  India?
Are Galician-Portuguese and Old Galician the same language?
Is the companion star of Gem (Mekbuda) visible with binoculars?
Is Gliese 876 the second red dwarf star found to possess a planetary system?
What type of poetry did the Liu Song dynasty produce?
Does Kerala have a HDI of 0.770 and a consumption-based HDI of 0.920?
Is Snorlax the 28th best pokemon?
How many people can speak French in Africa?
Was Liuxiu an emperor of the Eastern Han?
Is Maharashtra the most populous state in India?
To which territory was Nagpur annexed in 1853?
What is the world's fourth-largest French-speaking city?
How does Jigglypuff put its enemies to sleep?
Is Hindi influenced by Arabic?
Who conquered Western Liang in 587?
Which year did the Northern Wei dynasty unified northern China
What does Cancer identified with in Greek mythology?
What was the Jin dynasty preceded by?
Gujarat was also known as Pratichya and Varuna. 
What is the most popular religion in Maharashtra?
What is the Human Development Index (HDI) of Kerala in 2018?
Did the Shang dynasty fall before the year 1040 BC?
Does Psyduck appear in products owned by Nintendo?
How many official languages does India have?
What is the first dynasty that ruled over the Delhi Sultanate?
Which pokémon is a constant frustration for Misty?
What is the angular separation between β¹ Sagittarii and β² Sagittarii?
What body part does Squirtle use to protect itself from threat?
When was the Persian element of Hindi marginalised by Sankritisation?
What were the materials that the peasants wore in the Han dynasty?
Was creating a royal calendar a duty of the king?
Which Pokémon is known as the "Genetic  Pokémon"?
Which celestial hemisphere is Sagittarius located?
